# BAGP-UKNEQAS-project-p53-interpretation-guide-2016


---
[PAGE 1/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
1

Interpretation of p53 Immunohistochemistry In Tubo-Ovarian
Carcinoma: Guidelines for Reporting
Author: Martin Köbel1
Co-authors: W Glenn McCluggage2, C Blake Gilks3, Naveena Singh4
1University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada; 2Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, UK; 3Vanvouver General Hospital and University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada; 4Barts Health NHS trust, London, UK.
Background
 p53 immunohistochemistry (IHC) is an accurate, cheap and fast method to investigate
TP53 mutation status [1].
 Historically, p53 IHC has been interpreted as negative or positive based on the
percentage of stained tumor cell nuclei using variable cut-offs which range from 5 to
50%.
 More recently, a tripartite interpretation has been suggested [2], wherein an
“overexpressed or no expression (all or nothing)” nuclear staining pattern is highly
predictive of underlying TP53 mutation while a normal/wild type pattern is not.
 Of note, rare cases with TP53 mutation rarely show cytoplasmic staining, and, about 5%
cases have a wild type pattern [1].
 As a result p53 IHC can be interpreted as either “Normal” or “Abnormal”, as shown
below.
p53 immunohistochemistry pattern and interpretation
Pattern
p53 IHC
Interpretation
TP53 mutation type
% in HGSC
TP53 MUTATION ABSENT
Wild type
Normal
No mutation
0
TP53 MUTATION PRESENT
Overexpression
Abnormal
Non-synonymous (missense); also in-
frame deletion, splicing
66%
Complete absence/
null
Abnormal
Indels, stopgains, splicing mutations
25%
Cytoplasmic
Abnormal
Indels and stopgains with disruption of
the nuclear localization domain
4%
Wild type
Normal*
Truncating mutation
5%
HGSC- high-grade serous carcinoma



---
[PAGE 2/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
2

 “Normal” indicates that there is no evidence of an underlying TP53 mutation, i.e. TP53 is
wild type
o *exception for normal:  truncating mutations can be associated with wild type
pattern (see note)
 “Abnormal” indicates that there is evidence of TP53 mutation.
 Interpretation as negative/positive is ambiguous and therefore strongly discouraged.

NOTE: High-grade serous carcinomas (HGSC) ubiquitously (i.e. 100%) harbor TP53
mutations but only 95% show abnormal p53 staining.  In other words, 5% of HGSC show
normal p53 immunohistochemistry (wild type pattern) but still harbor a TP53 mutation [1].
These are truncating mutations, which are characterized by a late stopgain resulting in
translation of truncated protein, which can be detected by most N-terminal directed
antibodies.




---
[PAGE 3/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
3

Wild type pattern (Normal p53 IHC)
 The distribution of nuclear staining in a ‘wild type’ pattern ranges from a few positive
cells to almost all cells staining, but with variable intensity.
 In general, the intensity and extent of nuclear staining is associated with the
proliferation index, eg, basal keratinocytes of normal skin or epithelial cells of colonic
crypts bases show variable p53 staining while the mitotically inactive superficial
keratinocytes or luminal colonic epithelial cells are negative.
 Stromal fibroblasts and intratumoral lymphocytes also show wild type pattern and are
used as intrinsic control (see examples below).
Figure 1a. Wild type pattern in an
endometrioid carcinoma with the majority of
tumor cells being negative but some showing
variable intensity (only few strong).
Figure 1b. Wild type pattern in a low-grade
serous carcinoma with >80% of tumor cell
nuclei staining with variable intensity (only
few strong). The staining is of similar intensity
to that in  germinal centers (left Fig. 2).




---
[PAGE 4/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
4

Figure 2a. Wild type pattern in a germinal
center B-cells
Figure 2b. Wild type pattern in normal
squamous epithelium

Figure 3. Wild type patternin fallopian tubes




---
[PAGE 5/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
5

Overexpression (Abnormal p53 IHC)
 Overexpression is defined as strong nuclear staining in at least 80% of tumor cell
nuclei (usually 100% tumor cell nuclei, the 80% cut-off accounts for technical artifacts
and the rare mosaic pattern, see below).
 Overexpression is the most common (~66%) pattern observed in HGSC, almost certainly
signifying an underlying TP53 mutation.
 p53 overexpression is strongly associated with nonsynonymous (or missense) TP53
mutations, however, in- frame deletions and splicing mutations can also result in this
pattern.
 These mutations interfere with MDM2 mediated ubiquitination resulting in massive
nuclear accumulation of the p53 protein.
Figure 3. Overexpression seen in two high-grade serous carcinomas. Virtually all tumor cell
nuclei show strong staining intensity compared to the intrinsic control (stromal fibroblasts).




---
[PAGE 6/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
6

Complete absence or null pattern (Abnormal)
 Complete absence is defined as no staining in tumor cell nuclei in the presence of
‘wild-type’, ie variable, staining in normal background cells (intrinsic control present).
The interpretation is similar to that of DNA mismatch repair gene protein expression.
 Complete absence is observed in ~25% of HGSC.
 Complete absence is almost certainly indicative of underlying TP53 mutation.
 The type of mutation includes indels, stopgains and splicing mutations.
 The former two result in a premature stopgain, in which the shorter mRNA is subjected
to nonsense mediated decay resulting in no mRNA and therefore no translated protein.
Figure 4. Complete absence in two high-grade serous carcinomas. No staining in tumor cell
nuclei but the intrinsic stromal nuclear positive control is clearly visible.




---
[PAGE 7/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
7

Cytoplasmic (Abnormal)
 Cytoplasmic staining is defined as predominant cytoplasmic staining in the absence of
strong nuclear staining in >80% of tumor cell nuclei, i.e. the nuclear staining can be
absent or weak and variable.
 The cytoplasmic pattern is seen in ~4% of high-grade serous carcinomas and is
associated with underlying TP53 mutation.
 The types of mutation include indel and stopgain with disruption of the nuclear
localization domain.

Figure 5. Cytoplasmic staining seen in two high-grade serous carcinomas. Note strong to
moderate cytoplasmic staining seen in the epithelial compartment but not in the intrinsic
control (stromal compartment).




---
[PAGE 8/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
8

Problematic Areas in p53 Interpretation
 For diagnostic purposes it is currently more important to distinguish between presence
and absence of the TP53 mutation, i.e. the distinction of normal versus abnormal p53
immunohistochemistry.
 The specific abnormal pattern may become important in the future with p53-targeted
therapies entering clinical trials.
 Herein, we focus on interpretational issues that commonly arise in the distinction
between normal and the three abnormal patterns:

1. Wild type pattern versus overexpression
a. “High” wild type staining due to high proliferation/strong staining
b. “Low” overexpression due to antigen degradation, splicing mutations, or weak
staining
c. Heterogeneous staining

2. Wild type pattern versus complete absence
a. “Low” wild type pattern due to low proliferation, antigen degradation, or weak
staining
b. Lack intrinsic control
c. Occasional tumor cell staining in otherwise complete absence pattern
d. True p53 IHC wild type high-grade serous carcinomas

3. Wild type pattern versus cytoplasmic
a. Threshold for diagnosis of cytoplasmic staining is not well established
b. Recognition of spurious cytoplasmic staining



---
[PAGE 9/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
9

1 - Wild type pattern versus overexpression (Fig. 6)
Figure 6a. Reference wild type pattern

Figure 6b: Reference overexpression

1a. “High” wild type staining due to high proliferation or strong staining (Fig. 7a)
 Staining of overall strong intensity results in a larger proportion of nuclei being strongly
stained, with potential for a ‘wild type’ pattern to be interpreted as overexpression.
 Staining remains variable and <80% nuclei should show strong staining.
 The level of staining in the intrinsic control should serve as a rough guide.
Figure 7a. “High” wild type pattern in an endometrioid and low-grade serous tumor. The
staining shows variable intensity. Note,  only a minority of nuclei are stongly stained. The
intrinsic control in the case on the right is indicating strong staining.




---
[PAGE 10/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
10

1b. “Low” overexpression due to antigen degradation, splicing mutations, or weak staining
(Fig. 7b)
 Staining of overall weak intensity results in a smaller proportion of nuclei being strongly
stained, with potential for overexpression to be interpreted as a ‘wild type’ pattern.
 The majority of nuclei stain strongly but a significant proportion stain weakly or are
negative
 >80% nuclei should show strong staining.
 The level of staining in the intrinsic control should serve as a rough guide.
Figure 7b. “Low” overexpression in two high-grade serous carcinomas appearing as so called
“mosaic” pattern. The majority of nuclei staining strongly but a significant proportion being
negative (approaching 80% cut-off)

1c. Heterogeneous staining (Fig 8)
 Heterogeneous staining is defined by the presence of more than one pattern.
  It is rarely seen (<3%) in high-grade serous carcinomas, since TP53 mutations are an
early ancestral event and should be present in all tumor cells [3].
 This is most likely due to poor antigen preservation (i.e. delayed fixation), however,
alternative explanations, such as underlying splicing mutation with different effects on
p53 expression in different cells of the same tumor cannot not be excluded.
 In contrast, TP53 mutations are acquired during progression of other histotypes such as
mucinous carcinoma [4]; here, heterogeneous p53 expression can be expected and



---
[PAGE 11/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
11

should be reported as such, e.g. p53 expression abnormal (heterogeneous with areas of
overexpression and wild type pattern).
Figure 8. Heterogeneous staining in the same high-grade serous carcinomas with an area
bordering wild type pattern (left) and an area of typical overexpression (right).

Figure 9a. High-grade serous carcinoma with
heterogeneous staining: lower right =
overexpression, upper left = wild type pattern.
Figure 9b. Mucinous carcinoma with
heterogeneous staining.



---
[PAGE 12/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
12

2. Wild type pattern versus complete absence (Figure 10)
 Staining of overall weak intensity can result in absent nuclear staining in a large
proportion or all nuclei, with potential for a ‘wild type’ pattern to be interpreted as
complete absence.
 The level of staining in the intrinsic control should serve as a rough guide.
 A complete absence pattern should not be reported in the absence of a positive intrinsic
control of stromal cells and lymphocytes with variable but discernible nuclear staining.
 Examples are illustrated below in Figures 11-14.
Figure 10a: Reference wild type pattern

Figure 10b. Reference complete absence
Figure 11 The same case of clear cell carcinoma stained on two platforms. Left: occasional
tumor cell nuclei weakly stained (arrow) consistent with wild type pattern. Right: stronger
staining with more positivity but variable intensity.



---
[PAGE 13/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
13

Figure 12. Same high-grade serous carcinoma stained on two platforms. Left, there is no
positive internal control, case is non interpretable, right, clear variable staining of internal
control clearly interpretable as complete absence

Figure 12a. Non-interpretable due to lack of
internal control
Figure 12a. Complete absence with scant
internal control (arrow)




---
[PAGE 14/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
14

Figure 13.  Complete absence in high-grade serous carcinoma from cell block. Left: low power
(10x) showing abundance of normal inflammatory cells giving the impression of wild type
pattern but on high power (20x, right), the actual tumor cells are completely negative.

Fig. 14a Occasional tumor cells (arrow)
staining in an otherwise complete absence
high-grade serous carcinoma. This may be due
to non-specific staining and is to be
distinguished from the right.
Fig. 14a Occasional tumor cells (arrow)
staining in a high-grade serous carcinoma can
also be interpreted as wild type pattern. Note,
5% of high-grade serous carcinomas (those
with truncating mutations) show p53 wild type
pattern.




---
[PAGE 15/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
15

4. Wild type pattern versus cytoplasmic (Figure 15)
 Weak cytoplasmic staining may be seen in cases with otherwise clearly interpretable
nuclear staining.
 In order to reflect an underlying mutation the intensity of cytoplasmic staining should
be at least moderate and unaccompanied by any spurious cytoplasmic staining of the
background normal cells.
 The nuclear staining intensity in cytoplasmic pattern can be absent or variable but not
strong diffuse.

Figure 15a: Reference wild type pattern

Figure 15b. Reference cytoplasmic
Figure 16a. High wild type pattern with weak
cytoplasmic (background) staining but
interpretable variable nuclear staining.
Figure 16b. Cytoplasmic pattern with
moderate cytoplasmic staining and nonspecific
nuclear staining



---
[PAGE 16/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
16

Figure 17a. Overexpression pattern in high-
grade serous carcinoma showing an area of
spurious artificial cytoplasmic staining (upper
left).
Figure 17b. Overexpression pattern in high-
grade serous carcinoma showing an extensive
spurious artificial cytoplasmic staining
including the stromal component.




---
[PAGE 17/17]



Guidance document: p53 IHC reporting in tubo-ovarian carcinoma version 1.0, dated October 2016
17