# O-RADS-MRI-score-table-2020


---
[PAGE 1/2]

O-RADS™ MRI Risk Stratification System September 2020

O-RADS MRI Risk Score Governing Concepts:
1. O-RADS MRI assumes an average risk patient with no acute symptoms. Clinical management directed by the treating
physician would supersede management recommendations based on imaging alone.
2. Categorize patient as pre- or postmenopausal (defined as ≥ 1 year amenorrhea).
3. In case of multiple or bilateral lesions, each lesion should be separately characterized, and management will be driven
by lesion with highest score.
4.  Benign mature teratomas (dermoids): Characteristic benign mature teratoma (cystic lesions that contain macroscopic
fat) may be scored as O-RADS MRI 2, due to the very low risk of malignancy. Characteristic benign mature teratomas
may contain septations or minimal enhancement of Rokitansky nodules and these findings do not upgrade the lesion to
O-RADS MRI Score 4. However, fatty adnexal lesions that contain a large amount of enhancing soft tissue are classified
as O-RADS MRI Score 4 due to risk of immature teratoma or other malignant tissue.
5. Some characteristic lesions can be confidently diagnosed on MRI regardless of the O-RADS MRI Score category. In
these cases, the final radiological diagnosis can be reported (e.g. dysgerminoma, granulosa cell tumor, lymphoma,
papillary serous tumors, peritoneal pseudocyst, etc.).
6. Dynamic contrast enhancement (DCE) with perfusion time intensity curves are preferred over non-dynamic DCE post-
contrast imaging for risk assessment. DCE time resolution should be of 15 seconds or less.
7. Abbreviated schematic below provides guidance for initial assessment of adnexal lesions. If the lesion does not fit this
schema, refer to the expanded O-RADS MRI risk stratification table.
Table 1. Abbreviated schematic for initial assessment for O-RADS MRI scores 1 (no adnexal lesion), 2 (almost
certainly benign adnexal lesion) and 5 (high risk for malignant adnexal lesion)
O-RADS MRI 1
No tubo-ovarian lesion.
Physiologic follicle, corpus luteum or hemorrhagic cyst <3cm in pre-menopausal woman.
O-RADS MRI 2
Unilocular cyst with no enhancing wall and no solid tissue.
Characteristic simple hydrosalpinx, peritoneal inclusion cyst, endometrioma, or mature teratoma with no
solid tissue.
Solid tissue with very low homogenous signal on T2WI and DWI.
O-RADS MRI 5
Adnexal lesion with solid tissue with a high risk time intensity curve on DCE MRI.
Adnexal lesion with solid tissue enhancing > myometrium at 30-40 seconds on the non-DCE MRI.
Definite peritoneal or omental thickening or nodules.

T2WI = T2 weighted image
DWI = Diffusion weighted image
DCE MRI = Dynamic contrast enhancement magnetic resonance imaging




---
[PAGE 2/2]

O-RADS™ MRI Risk Stratification System September 2020

O-RADS MRI Risk Stratification and Management System
O-RADS
MRI
Score
Risk
Category
Positive
Predictive
Value for
Malignancy^
Lexicon
Description

0
Incomplete
Evaluation
N/A
N/A

1

Normal
Ovaries

N/A
No ovarian lesion
Follicle defined as simple cyst ≤ 3 cm in a premenopausal woman
Hemorrhagic cyst ≤ 3 cm in a premenopausal woman
Corpus luteum +/- hemorrhage ≤ 3 cm in a premenopausal woman

2

Almost
Certainly
Benign

<0.5%^
Cyst: Unilocular- any type of fluid content
 No wall enhancement
 No enhancing solid tissue*
Cyst: Unilocular – simple or endometriotic fluid content
 Smooth enhancing wall
 No enhancing solid tissue
Lesion with lipid content**
 No enhancing solid tissue
Lesion with “dark T2/dark DWI” solid tissue
 Homogeneously hypointense on T2 and DWI
Dilated fallopian tube - simple fluid content
 Thin, smooth wall/endosalpingeal folds with enhancement
 No enhancing solid tissue
Para-ovarian cyst – any type of fluid
 Thin, smooth wall +/- enhancement
 No enhancing solid tissue

3

Low Risk

~5%^
Cyst: Unilocular – proteinaceous, hemorrhagic or mucinous fluid content***
 Smooth enhancing wall
 No enhancing solid tissue
Cyst: Multilocular - Any type of fluid, no lipid content
 Smooth septae and wall with enhancement
 No enhancing solid tissue
Lesion with solid tissue (excluding T2 dark/DWI dark)
 Low risk time intensity curve on DCE MRI
Dilated fallopian tube –
 Non-simple fluid: Thin wall /folds
 Simple fluid: Thick, smooth wall/ folds
 No enhancing solid tissue

4

Intermediate
Risk

~50%^
Lesion with solid tissue (excluding T2 dark/DWI dark)
 Intermediate risk time intensity curve on DCE MRI
 If DCE MRI is not feasible, score 4 is any lesion with solid tissue (excluding T2 dark/DWI
dark) that is enhancing ≤ myometrium at 30-40s on non-DCE MRI
Lesion with lipid content
 Large volume enhancing solid tissue

5

High Risk

~90%^
Lesion with solid tissue (excluding T2 dark/DWI dark)
 High risk time intensity curve on DCE MRI
 If DCE MRI is not feasible, score 5 is any lesion with solid tissue (excluding T2
dark/DWI dark) that is enhancing > myometrium at 30-40s on non-DCE MRI

Peritoneal, mesenteric or omental nodularity or irregular thickening with or without ascites
^Approximate PPV based on data from Thomassin-Naggara, et al. O-RADS MRI Score for Risk Stratification of Sonographically Indeterminate Adnexal
Masses. JAMA Network Open. 2020;3(1):e1919896. Please note that the PPV provided applies to the score category overall and not to individual
characteristics. Definitive PPV are not currently available for individual characteristics. The PPV values for malignancy include both borderline tumors
and invasive cancers.
* Solid tissue is defined as a lesion component that enhances and conforms to one of these morphologies: papillary projection, mural nodule, irregular
septation/wall or other larger solid portions.
** Minimal enhancement of Rokitansky nodules in lesion containing lipid does not change to O-RADS MRI 4.
*** Hemorrhagic cyst <3cm in pre-menopausal woman is O-RADS MRI 1.
DCE = dynamic contrast enhancement with a time resolution of 15 seconds or less
DWI = diffusion weighted images
MRI = magnetic resonance imaging

