# RECISTGuidelines


---
[PAGE 1/20]

New response evaluation criteria in solid tumours:
Revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1)
E.A. Eisenhauera,*, P. Therasseb, J. Bogaertsc, L.H. Schwartzd, D. Sargente, R. Fordf,
J. Danceyg, S. Arbuckh, S. Gwytheri, M. Mooneyg, L. Rubinsteing, L. Shankarg, L. Doddg,
R. Kaplanj, D. Lacombec, J. Verweijk
aNational Cancer Institute of Canada – Clinical Trials Group, 10 Stuart Street, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada
bGlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium
cEuropean Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer, Data Centre, Brussels, Belgium
dMemorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA
eMayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
fRadPharm, Princeton, NJ, USA
gDivision of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA
hSchering-Plough, Kenilworth, NJ, USA
iEast Surrey Hospital, Redhill, Surrey, UK
jNational Cancer Research Network, Leeds, UK
kErasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article history:
Received 17 October 2008
Accepted 29 October 2008
Keywords:
Response criteria
Solid tumours
Guidelines
A B S T R A C T
Background: Assessment of the change in tumour burden is an important feature of the
clinical evaluation of cancer therapeutics: both tumour shrinkage (objective response)
and disease progression are useful endpoints in clinical trials. Since RECIST was published
in 2000, many investigators, cooperative groups, industry and government authorities have
adopted these criteria in the assessment of treatment outcomes. However, a number of
questions and issues have arisen which have led to the development of a revised RECIST
guideline (version 1.1). Evidence for changes, summarised in separate papers in this special
issue, has come from assessment of a large data warehouse (>6500 patients), simulation
studies and literature reviews.
Highlights of revised RECIST 1.1: Major changes include: Number of lesions to be assessed: based
on evidence from numerous trial databases merged into a data warehouse for analysis pur-
poses, the number of lesions required to assess tumour burden for response determination
has been reduced from a maximum of 10 to a maximum of ﬁve total (and from ﬁve to two
per organ, maximum). Assessment of pathological lymph nodes is now incorporated: nodes
with a short axis of P15 mm are considered measurable and assessable as target lesions.
The short axis measurement should be included in the sum of lesions in calculation of
tumour response. Nodes that shrink to <10 mm short axis are considered normal. Conﬁrma-
tion of response is required for trials with response primary endpoint but is no longer
required in randomised studies since the control arm serves as appropriate means of inter-
pretation of data. Disease progression is clariﬁed in several aspects: in addition to the previ-
ous deﬁnition of progression in target disease of 20% increase in sum, a 5 mm absolute
increase is now required as well to guard against over calling PD when the total sum is very
0959-8049/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ejca.2008.10.026
* Corresponding author: Tel.: +1 613 533 6430; fax: +1 613 533 2411.
E-mail address: eeisenhauer@ctg.queensu.ca (E.A. Eisenhauer).
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
available at www.sciencedirect.com
journal homepage: www.ejconline.com



---
[PAGE 2/20]

small. Furthermore, there is guidance offered on what constitutes ‘unequivocal progres-
sion’ of non-measurable/non-target disease, a source of confusion in the original RECIST
guideline. Finally, a section on detection of new lesions, including the interpretation of
FDG-PET scan assessment is included. Imaging guidance: the revised RECIST includes a
new imaging appendix with updated recommendations on the optimal anatomical assess-
ment of lesions.
Future work: A key question considered by the RECIST Working Group in developing RECIST
1.1 was whether it was appropriate to move from anatomic unidimensional assessment of
tumour burden to either volumetric anatomical assessment or to functional assessment
with PET or MRI. It was concluded that, at present, there is not sufﬁcient standardisation
or evidence to abandon anatomical assessment of tumour burden. The only exception to
this is in the use of FDG-PET imaging as an adjunct to determination of progression. As
is detailed in the ﬁnal paper in this special issue, the use of these promising newer
approaches requires appropriate clinical validation studies.
 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1.
Background
1.1.
History of RECIST criteria
Assessment of the change in tumour burden is an important
feature of the clinical evaluation of cancer therapeutics. Both
tumour shrinkage (objective response) and time to the devel-
opment of disease progression are important endpoints in
cancer clinical trials. The use of tumour regression as the
endpoint for phase II trials screening new agents for evi-
dence of anti-tumour effect is supported by years of evi-
dence suggesting that, for many solid tumours, agents
which produce tumour shrinkage in a proportion of patients
have a reasonable (albeit imperfect) chance of subsequently
demonstrating an improvement in overall survival or other
time to event measures in randomised phase III studies (re-
viewed in [1–4]). At the current time objective response car-
ries with it a body of evidence greater than for any other
biomarker supporting its utility as a measure of promising
treatment effect in phase II screening trials. Furthermore,
at both the phase II and phase III stage of drug development,
clinical trials in advanced disease settings are increasingly
utilising time to progression (or progression-free survival)
as an endpoint upon which efﬁcacy conclusions are drawn,
which is also based on anatomical measurement of tumour
size.
However, both of these tumour endpoints, objective re-
sponse and time to disease progression, are useful only if
based on widely accepted and readily applied standard crite-
ria based on anatomical tumour burden. In 1981 the World
Health Organisation (WHO) ﬁrst published tumour response
criteria, mainly for use in trials where tumour response was
the primary endpoint. The WHO criteria introduced the con-
cept of an overall assessment of tumour burden by summing
the products of bidimensional lesion measurements and
determined response to therapy by evaluation of change from
baseline while on treatment.5 However, in the decades that
followed their publication, cooperative groups and pharma-
ceutical companies that used the WHO criteria often ‘modi-
ﬁed’ them to accommodate new technologies or to address
areas that were unclear in the original document. This led
to confusion in interpretation of trial results6 and in fact,
the application of varying response criteria was shown to lead
to very different conclusions about the efﬁcacy of the same
regimen.7 In response to these problems, an International
Working Party was formed in the mid 1990s to standardise
and simplify response criteria. New criteria, known as RECIST
(Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours), were pub-
lished in 2000.8 Key features of the original RECIST include
deﬁnitions of minimum size of measurable lesions, instruc-
tions on how many lesions to follow (up to 10; a maximum
ﬁve per organ site), and the use of unidimensional, rather
than bidimensional, measures for overall evaluation of tu-
mour burden. These criteria have subsequently been widely
adopted by academic institutions, cooperative groups, and
industry for trials where the primary endpoints are objective
response or progression. In addition, regulatory authorities
accept
RECIST
as
an
appropriate
guideline
for
these
assessments.
1.2.
Why update RECIST?
Since RECIST was published in 2000, many investigators have
conﬁrmed in prospective analyses the validity of substituting
unidimensional for bidimensional (and even three-dimen-
sional)-based criteria (reviewed in [9]). With rare exceptions
(e.g. mesothelioma), the use of unidimensional criteria seems
to perform well in solid tumour phase II studies.
However, a number of questions and issues have arisen
which merit answers and further clarity. Amongst these
are whether fewer than 10 lesions can be assessed without
affecting the overall assigned response for patients (or the
conclusion about activity in trials); how to apply RECIST in
randomised phase III trials where progression, not response,
is the primary endpoint particularly if not all patients have
measurable disease; whether or how to utilise newer imag-
ing technologies such as FDG-PET and MRI; how to handle
assessment of lymph nodes; whether response conﬁrmation
is truly needed; and, not least, the applicability of RECIST in
trials of targeted non-cytotoxic drugs. This revision of the
RECIST guidelines includes updates that touch on all these
points.
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
229



---
[PAGE 3/20]

1.3.
Process of RECIST 1.1 development
The RECIST Working Group, consisting of clinicians with
expertise in early drug development from academic research
organisations, government and industry, together with imag-
ing specialists and statisticians, has met regularly to set the
agenda for an update to RECIST, determine the evidence
needed to justify the various changes made, and to review
emerging evidence. A critical aspect of the revision process
was to create a database of prospectively documented solid
tumour measurement data obtained from industry and aca-
demic group trials. This database, assembled at the EORTC
Data Centre under the leadership of Jan Bogaerts and Patrick
Therasse (co-authors of this guideline), consists of >6500 pa-
tients with >18,000 target lesions and was utilised to investi-
gate the impact of a variety of questions (e.g. number of
target lesions required, the need for response conﬁrmation,
and lymph node measurement rules) on response and pro-
gression-free survival outcomes. The results of this work,
which after evaluation by the RECIST Working Group led to
most of the changes in this revised guideline, are reported
in detail in a separate paper in this special issue.10 Larry Sch-
wartz and Robert Ford (also co-authors of this guideline) also
provided key databases from which inferences have been
made that inform these revisions.11
The publication of this revised guideline is believed to be
timely since it incorporates changes to simplify, optimise
and standardise the assessment of tumour burden in clinical
trials. A summary of key changes is found in Appendix I. Be-
cause the fundamental approach to assessment remains
grounded in the anatomical, rather than functional, assess-
ment of disease, we have elected to name this version RECIST
1.1, rather than 2.0.
1.4.
What about volumetric or functional assessment?
This raises the question, frequently posed, about whether it is
‘time’ to move from anatomic unidimensional assessment of
tumour burden to either volumetric anatomical assessment
or to functional assessment (e.g. dynamic contrast enhanced
MRI or CT or (18)F-ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomographic (FDG-PET) techniques assessing tumour metab-
olism). As can be seen, the Working Group and particularly
those involved in imaging research, did not believe that there
is at present sufﬁcient standardisation and widespread avail-
ability to recommend adoption of these alternative assess-
ment methods. The only exception to this is in the use of
FDG-PET imaging as an adjunct to determination of progres-
sion, as described later in this guideline. As detailed in paper
in this special issue12, we believe that the use of these prom-
ising newer approaches (which could either add to or substitute
for anatomical assessment as described in RECIST) requires
appropriate and rigorous clinical validation studies. This pa-
per by Sargent et al. illustrates the type of data that will be
needed to be able to deﬁne ‘endpoints’ for these modalities
and how to determine where and when such criteria/modal-
ities can be used to improve the reliability with which truly
active new agents are identiﬁed and truly inactive new agents
are discarded in comparison to RECIST criteria in phase II
screening trials. The RECIST Working Group looks forward
to such data emerging in the next few years to allow the
appropriate changes to the next iteration of the RECIST
criteria.
2.
Purpose of this guideline
This guideline describes a standard approach to solid tumour
measurement and deﬁnitions for objective assessment of
change in tumour size for use in adult and paediatric cancer
clinical trials. It is expected these criteria will be useful in all
trials where objective response is the primary study endpoint,
as well as in trials where assessment of stable disease, tu-
mour progression or time to progression analyses are under-
taken, since all of these outcome measures are based on an
assessment of anatomical tumour burden and its change on
study. There are no assumptions in this paper about the pro-
portion of patients meeting the criteria for any of these end-
points which will signal that an agent or treatment regimen is
active: those deﬁnitions are dependent on type of cancer in
which a trial is being undertaken and the speciﬁc agent(s) un-
der study. Protocols must include appropriate statistical sec-
tions which deﬁne the efﬁcacy parameters upon which the
trial sample size and decision criteria are based. In addition
to providing deﬁnitions and criteria for assessment of tumour
response,
this
guideline
also
makes
recommendations
regarding standard reporting of the results of trials that utilise
tumour response as an endpoint.
While these guidelines may be applied in malignant brain
tumour studies, there are also separate criteria published for
response assessment in that setting.13 This guideline is not in-
tended for use for studies of malignant lymphoma since
international guidelines for response assessment in lym-
phoma are published separately.14
Finally, many oncologists in their daily clinical practice fol-
low their patients’ malignant disease by means of repeated
imaging studies and make decisions about continued therapy
on the basis of both objective and symptomatic criteria. It is
not intended that these RECIST guidelines play a role in that
decision making, except if determined appropriate by the
treating oncologist.
3.
Measurability of tumour at baseline
3.1.
Deﬁnitions
At baseline, tumour lesions/lymph nodes will be categorised
measurable or non-measurable as follows:
3.1.1.
Measurable
Tumour lesions: Must be accurately measured in at least one
dimension (longest diameter in the plane of measurement is
to be recorded) with a minimum size of:
• 10 mm by CT scan (CT scan slice thickness no greater than
5 mm; see Appendix II on imaging guidance).
• 10 mm caliper measurement by clinical exam (lesions
which cannot be accurately measured with calipers should
be recorded as non-measurable).
• 20 mm by chest X-ray.
230
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7



---
[PAGE 4/20]

Malignant lymph nodes: To be considered pathologically en-
larged and measurable, a lymph node must be P15 mm in
short axis when assessed by CT scan (CT scan slice thickness
recommended to be no greater than 5 mm). At baseline and in
follow-up, only the short axis will be measured and followed
(see Schwartz et al. in this Special Issue15). See also notes be-
low on ‘Baseline documentation of target and non-target le-
sions’ for information on lymph node measurement.
3.1.2.
Non-measurable
All other lesions, including small lesions (longest diameter
<10 mm or pathological lymph nodes with P10 to <15 mm
short axis) as well as truly non-measurable lesions. Lesions
considered truly non-measurable include: leptomeningeal dis-
ease, ascites, pleural or pericardial effusion, inﬂammatory
breast disease, lymphangitic involvement of skin or lung,
abdominal masses/abdominal organomegaly identiﬁed by
physical exam that is not measurable by reproducible imaging
techniques.
3.1.3.
Special considerations regarding lesion measurability
Bone lesions, cystic lesions, and lesions previously treated
with local therapy require particular comment:
Bone lesions:.
• Bone scan, PET scan or plain ﬁlms are not considered ade-
quate imaging techniques to measure bone lesions. How-
ever,
these
techniques
can
be
used
to
conﬁrm
the
presence or disappearance of bone lesions.
• Lytic bone lesions or mixed lytic-blastic lesions, with identi-
ﬁable soft tissue components, that can be evaluated by cross
sectional imaging techniques such as CT or MRI can be con-
sidered as measurable lesions if the soft tissue component
meets the deﬁnition of measurability described above.
• Blastic bone lesions are non-measurable.
Cystic lesions:.
• Lesions that meet the criteria for radiographically deﬁned
simple cysts should not be considered as malignant lesions
(neither measurable nor non-measurable) since they are, by
deﬁnition, simple cysts.
• ‘Cystic lesions’ thought to represent cystic metastases can
be considered as measurable lesions, if they meet the deﬁ-
nition of measurability described above. However, if non-
cystic lesions are present in the same patient, these are pre-
ferred for selection as target lesions.
Lesions with prior local treatment:.
• Tumour lesions situated in a previously irradiated area, or
in an area subjected to other loco-regional therapy, are usu-
ally not considered measurable unless there has been dem-
onstrated progression in the lesion. Study protocols should
detail the conditions under which such lesions would be
considered measurable.
3.2.
Speciﬁcations by methods of measurements
3.2.1.
Measurement of lesions
All measurements should be recorded in metric notation,
using calipers if clinically assessed. All baseline evaluations
should be performed as close as possible to the treatment
start and never more than 4 weeks before the beginning of
the treatment.
3.2.2.
Method of assessment
The same method of assessment and the same technique
should be used to characterise each identiﬁed and reported
lesion at baseline and during follow-up. Imaging based evalu-
ation should always be done rather than clinical examination
unless the lesion(s) being followed cannot be imaged but are
assessable by clinical exam.
Clinical lesions: Clinical lesions will only be considered mea-
surable when they are superﬁcial and P10 mm diameter as
assessed using calipers (e.g. skin nodules). For the case of skin
lesions, documentation by colour photography including a ru-
ler to estimate the size of the lesion is suggested. As noted
above, when lesions can be evaluated by both clinical exam
and imaging, imaging evaluation should be undertaken since
it is more objective and may also be reviewed at the end of the
study.
Chest X-ray: Chest CT is preferred over chest X-ray, particu-
larly when progression is an important endpoint, since CT is
more sensitive than X-ray, particularly in identifying new le-
sions. However, lesions on chest X-ray may be considered
measurable if they are clearly deﬁned and surrounded by aer-
ated lung. See Appendix II for more details.
CT, MRI: CT is the best currently available and reproducible
method to measure lesions selected for response assessment.
This guideline has deﬁned measurability of lesions on CT
scan based on the assumption that CT slice thickness is
5 mm or less. As is described in Appendix II, when CT scans
have slice thickness greater than 5 mm, the minimum size
for a measurable lesion should be twice the slice thickness.
MRI is also acceptable in certain situations (e.g. for body
scans). More details concerning the use of both CT and MRI
for assessment of objective tumour response evaluation are
provided in Appendix II.
Ultrasound: Ultrasound is not useful in assessment of lesion
size and should not be used as a method of measurement.
Ultrasound examinations cannot be reproduced in their en-
tirety for independent review at a later date and, because
they are operator dependent, it cannot be guaranteed that
the same technique and measurements will be taken from
one assessment to the next (described in greater detail in
Appendix II). If new lesions are identiﬁed by ultrasound in
the course of the study, conﬁrmation by CT or MRI is ad-
vised. If there is concern about radiation exposure at CT,
MRI may be used instead of CT in selected instances.
Endoscopy, laparoscopy: The utilisation of these techniques for
objective tumour evaluation is not advised. However, they
can be useful to conﬁrm complete pathological response
when biopsies are obtained or to determine relapse in trials
where recurrence following complete response or surgical
resection is an endpoint.
Tumour markers: Tumour markers alone cannot be used to as-
sess objective tumour response. If markers are initially above
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
231



---
[PAGE 5/20]

the upper normal limit, however, they must normalise for a
patient to be considered in complete response. Because
tumour markers are disease speciﬁc, instructions for their
measurement should be incorporated into protocols on a
disease speciﬁc basis. Speciﬁc guidelines for both CA-125
response (in recurrent ovarian cancer) and PSA response (in
recurrent prostate cancer), have been published.16–18 In addi-
tion, the Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup has developed CA125
progression criteria which are to be integrated with objective
tumour assessment for use in ﬁrst-line trials in ovarian
cancer.19
Cytology, histology: These techniques can be used to differenti-
ate between PR and CR in rare cases if required by protocol
(for example, residual lesions in tumour types such as germ
cell tumours, where known residual benign tumours can re-
main). When effusions are known to be a potential adverse
effect of treatment (e.g. with certain taxane compounds or
angiogenesis inhibitors), the cytological conﬁrmation of the
neoplastic origin of any effusion that appears or worsens dur-
ing treatment can be considered if the measurable tumour
has met criteria for response or stable disease in order to dif-
ferentiate between response (or stable disease) and progres-
sive disease.
4.
Tumour response evaluation
4.1.
Assessment of overall tumour burden and
measurable disease
To assess objective response or future progression, it is nec-
essary to estimate the overall tumour burden at baseline and
use this as a comparator for subsequent measurements.
Only patients with measurable disease at baseline should
be included in protocols where objective tumour response
is the primary endpoint. Measurable disease is deﬁned by
the presence of at least one measurable lesion (as detailed
above in Section 3). In studies where the primary endpoint
is tumour progression (either time to progression or propor-
tion with progression at a ﬁxed date), the protocol must
specify if entry is restricted to those with measurable disease
or whether patients having non-measurable disease only are
also eligible.
4.2.
Baseline documentation of ‘target’ and ‘non-target’
lesions
When more than one measurable lesion is present at baseline
all lesions up to a maximum of ﬁve lesions total (and a max-
imum of two lesions per organ) representative of all involved
organs should be identiﬁed as target lesions and will be re-
corded and measured at baseline (this means in instances
where patients have only one or two organ sites involved a
maximum of two and four lesions respectively will be re-
corded). For evidence to support the selection of only ﬁve tar-
get lesions, see analyses on a large prospective database in
the article by Bogaerts et al.10.
Target lesions should be selected on the basis of their size
(lesions with the longest diameter), be representative of all in-
volved organs, but in addition should be those that lend
themselves to reproducible repeated measurements. It may be
the case that, on occasion, the largest lesion does not lend it-
self to reproducible measurement in which circumstance the
next largest lesion which can be measured reproducibly
should be selected. To illustrate this point see the example
in Fig. 3 of Appendix II.
Lymph nodes merit special mention since they are normal
anatomical structures which may be visible by imaging even
if not involved by tumour. As noted in Section 3, pathological
nodes which are deﬁned as measurable and may be identi-
ﬁed as target lesions must meet the criterion of a short axis
of P15 mm by CT scan. Only the short axis of these nodes
will contribute to the baseline sum. The short axis of the
node is the diameter normally used by radiologists to judge
if a node is involved by solid tumour. Nodal size is normally
reported as two dimensions in the plane in which the image
is obtained (for CT scan this is almost always the axial plane;
for MRI the plane of acquisition may be axial, saggital or
coronal). The smaller of these measures is the short axis.
For example, an abdominal node which is reported as being
20 mm · 30 mm has a short axis of 20 mm and qualiﬁes as a
malignant, measurable node. In this example, 20 mm should
be recorded as the node measurement (See also the example
in Fig. 4 in Appendix II). All other pathological nodes (those
with short axis P10 mm but <15 mm) should be considered
non-target lesions. Nodes that have a short axis <10 mm
are considered non-pathological and should not be recorded
or followed.
A sum of the diameters (longest for non-nodal lesions, short
axis for nodal lesions) for all target lesions will be calculated
and reported as the baseline sum diameters. If lymph nodes
are to be included in the sum, then as noted above, only the
short axis is added into the sum. The baseline sum diameters
will be used as reference to further characterise any objective
tumour regression in the measurable dimension of the
disease.
All other lesions (or sites of disease) including pathological
lymph nodes should be identiﬁed as non-target lesions and
should also be recorded at baseline. Measurements are not re-
quired and these lesions should be followed as ‘present’, ‘ab-
sent’, or in rare cases ‘unequivocal progression’ (more details
to follow). In addition, it is possible to record multiple non-
target lesions involving the same organ as a single item on
the case record form (e.g. ‘multiple enlarged pelvic lymph
nodes’ or ‘multiple liver metastases’).
4.3.
Response criteria
This section provides the deﬁnitions of the criteria used to
determine objective tumour response for target lesions.
4.3.1.
Evaluation of target lesions
Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all target lesions.
Any pathological lymph nodes (whether target or
non-target) must have reduction in short axis to
<10 mm.
Partial Response (PR): At least a 30% decrease in the sum of
diameters of target lesions, taking as reference the
baseline sum diameters.
232
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7



---
[PAGE 6/20]

Progressive Disease (PD): At least a 20% increase in the sum
of diameters of target lesions, taking as reference
the smallest sum on study (this includes the baseline
sum if that is the smallest on study). In addition to
the relative increase of 20%, the sum must also dem-
onstrate an absolute increase of at least 5 mm. (Note:
the appearance of one or more new lesions is also
considered progression).
Stable Disease (SD): Neither sufﬁcient shrinkage to qualify for
PR nor sufﬁcient increase to qualify for PD, taking as
reference the smallest sum diameters while on study.
4.3.2.
Special notes on the assessment of target lesions
Lymph nodes. Lymph nodes identiﬁed as target lesions should
always have the actual short axis measurement recorded (mea-
sured in the same anatomical plane as the baseline examina-
tion), even if the nodes regress to below 10 mm on study. This
means that when lymph nodes are included as target lesions,
the ‘sum’ of lesions may not be zero even if complete response
criteria are met, since a normal lymph node is deﬁned as having
a short axis of <10 mm. Case report forms or other data collec-
tion methods may therefore be designed to have target nodal le-
sions recorded in a separate section where, in order to qualify
for CR, each node must achieve a short axis <10 mm. For PR,
SD and PD, the actual short axis measurement of the nodes is
to be included in the sum of target lesions.
Target lesions that become ‘too small to measure’. While on
study, all lesions (nodal and non-nodal) recorded at baseline
should have their actual measurements recorded at each sub-
sequent evaluation, even when very small (e.g. 2 mm). How-
ever, sometimes lesions or lymph nodes which are recorded
as target lesions at baseline become so faint on CT scan that
the radiologist may not feel comfortable assigning an exact
measure and may report them as being ‘too small to measure’.
When this occurs it is important that a value be recorded on
the case report form. If it is the opinion of the radiologist that
the lesion has likely disappeared, the measurement should be
recorded as 0 mm. If the lesion is believed to be present and is
faintly seen but too small to measure, a default value of 5 mm
should be assigned (Note: It is less likely that this rule will be
used for lymph nodes since they usually have a deﬁnable size
when normal and are frequently surrounded by fat such as in
the retroperitoneum; however, if a lymph node is believed to
be present and is faintly seen but too small to measure, a de-
fault value of 5 mm should be assigned in this circumstance as
well). This default value is derived from the 5 mm CT slice
thickness (but should not be changed with varying CT slice
thickness). The measurement of these lesions is potentially
non-reproducible, therefore providing this default value will
prevent false responses or progressions based upon measure-
ment error. To reiterate, however, if the radiologist is able to
provide an actual measure, that should be recorded, even if
it is below 5 mm.
Lesions that split or coalesce on treatment. As noted in Appen-
dix II, when non-nodal lesions ‘fragment’, the longest diame-
ters of the fragmented portions should be added together to
calculate the target lesion sum. Similarly, as lesions coalesce,
a plane between them may be maintained that would aid in
obtaining maximal diameter measurements of each individ-
ual lesion. If the lesions have truly coalesced such that they
are no longer separable, the vector of the longest diameter
in this instance should be the maximal longest diameter for
the ‘coalesced lesion’.
4.3.3.
Evaluation of non-target lesions
Thissection provides the deﬁnitionsofthe criteriausedtodeter-
mine the tumour response for the group of non-target lesions.
While some non-target lesions may actually be measurable,
they need not be measured and instead should be assessed only
qualitatively at the time points speciﬁed in the protocol.
Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of all non-target le-
sions and normalisation of tumour marker level. All
lymph nodes must be non-pathological in size
(<10 mm short axis).
Non-CR/Non-PD: Persistence of one or more non-target le-
sion(s) and/or maintenance of tumour marker level
above the normal limits.
Progressive Disease (PD): Unequivocal progression (see com-
ments below) of existing non-target lesions. (Note:
the appearance of one or more new lesions is also
considered progression).
4.3.4.
Special notes on assessment of progression of non-
target disease
The concept of progression of non-target disease requires
additional explanation as follows:
When the patient also has measurable disease. In this setting,
to achieve ‘unequivocal progression’ on the basis of the
non-target disease, there must be an overall level of substan-
tial worsening in non-target disease such that, even in pres-
ence of SD or PR in target disease, the overall tumour
burden has increased sufﬁciently to merit discontinuation
of therapy (see examples in Appendix II and further details
below). A modest ‘increase’ in the size of one or more non-tar-
get lesions is usually not sufﬁcient to quality for unequivocal
progression status. The designation of overall progression so-
lely on the basis of change in non-target disease in the face of
SD or PR of target disease will therefore be extremely rare.
When the patient has only non-measurable disease.This circum-
stance arises in some phase III trials when it is not a criterion of
study entry to have measurable disease. The same general con-
cepts apply here as noted above, however, in this instance there
is no measurable disease assessment to factor into the inter-
pretation of an increase in non-measurable disease burden.
Because worsening in non-target disease cannot be easily
quantiﬁed (by deﬁnition: if all lesions are truly non-measur-
able) a useful test that can be applied when assessing patients
for unequivocal progression is to consider if the increase in
overall disease burden based on the change in non-measurable
disease is comparable in magnitude to the increase that would
berequiredtodeclarePDformeasurabledisease: i.e.anincrease
in tumour burden representing an additional 73% increase in
‘volume’ (which is equivalent to a 20% increase diameter in a
measurable lesion). Examples include an increase in a pleural
effusion from ‘trace’ to ‘large’, an increase in lymphangitic
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
233



---
[PAGE 7/20]

disease from localised to widespread, or may be described in
protocols as ‘sufﬁcient to require a change in therapy’. Some
illustrative examples are shown in Figs. 5 and 6 in Appendix II.
If ‘unequivocal progression’ is seen, the patient should be con-
sidered to have had overall PD at that point. While it would be
ideal to have objective criteria to apply to non-measurable dis-
ease, the very nature of that disease makes it impossible to do
so, therefore the increase must be substantial.
4.3.5.
New lesions
The appearance of new malignant lesions denotes disease
progression; therefore, some comments on detection of new
lesions are important. There are no speciﬁc criteria for the
identiﬁcation of new radiographic lesions; however, the ﬁnd-
ing of a new lesion should be unequivocal: i.e. not attributable
to differences in scanning technique, change in imaging
modality or ﬁndings thought to represent something other
than tumour (for example, some ‘new’ bone lesions may be
simply healing or ﬂare of pre-existing lesions). This is partic-
ularly important when the patient’s baseline lesions show
partial or complete response. For example, necrosis of a liver
lesion may be reported on a CT scan report as a ‘new’ cystic
lesion, which it is not.
A lesion identiﬁed on a follow-up study in an anatomical
location that was not scanned at baseline is considered a new
lesion andwill indicate diseaseprogression. An example of this
is the patient who has visceral disease at baseline and while on
study has a CTor MRI brain ordered which reveals metastases.
The patient’s brain metastases are considered to be evidence of
PD even if he/she did not have brain imaging at baseline.
If a new lesion is equivocal, for example because of its
small size, continued therapy and follow-up evaluation will
clarify if it represents truly new disease. If repeat scans con-
ﬁrm there is deﬁnitely a new lesion, then progression should
be declared using the date of the initial scan.
While FDG-PET response assessments need additional
study, it is sometimes reasonable to incorporate the use of
FDG-PET scanning to complement CT scanning in assessment
of progression (particularly possible ‘new’ disease). New le-
sions on the basis of FDG-PET imaging can be identiﬁed
according to the following algorithm:
a. Negative FDG-PET at baseline, with a positivel FDG-PET
at follow-up is a sign of PD based on a new lesion.
b. No FDG-PET at baseline and a positive FDG-PET at fol-
low-up:
If the positive FDG-PET at follow-up corresponds to a
new site of disease conﬁrmed by CT, this is PD.
If the positive FDG-PET at follow-up is not conﬁrmed as
a new site of disease on CT, additional follow-up CT
scans are needed to determine if there is truly progres-
sion occurring at that site (if so, the date of PD will be
the date of the initial abnormal FDG-PET scan).
If the positive FDG-PET at follow-up corresponds to a
pre-existing site of disease on CT that is not progress-
ing on the basis of the anatomic images, this is not PD.
4.4.
Evaluation of best overall response
The best overall response is the best response recorded from
the start of the study treatment until the end of treatment
taking into account any requirement for conﬁrmation. On oc-
casion a response may not be documented until after the end
of therapy so protocols should be clear if post-treatment
assessments are to be considered in determination of best
overall response. Protocols must specify how any new therapy
introduced before progression will affect best response desig-
nation. The patient’s best overall response assignment will
depend on the ﬁndings of both target and non-target disease
and will also take into consideration the appearance of new
lesions. Furthermore, depending on the nature of the study
and the protocol requirements, it may also require conﬁrma-
tory measurement (see Section 4.6). Speciﬁcally, in non-ran-
domised trials where response is the primary endpoint,
conﬁrmation of PR or CR is needed to deem either one the
‘best overall response’. This is described further below.
4.4.1.
Time point response
It is assumed that at each protocol speciﬁed time point, a re-
sponse assessment occurs. Table 1 on the next page provides
a summary of the overall response status calculation at each
time point for patients who have measurable disease at
baseline.
When patients have non-measurable (therefore non-tar-
get) disease only, Table 2 is to be used.
4.4.2.
Missing assessments and inevaluable designation
When no imaging/measurement is done at all at a particular
time point, the patient is not evaluable (NE) at that time point.
If only a subset of lesion measurements are made at an
assessment, usually the case is also considered NE at that
time point, unless a convincing argument can be made that
the contribution of the individual missing lesion(s) would
not change the assigned time point response. This would be
most likely to happen in the case of PD. For example, if a pa-
tient had a baseline sum of 50 mm with three measured le-
sions and at follow-up only two lesions were assessed, but
those gave a sum of 80 mm, the patient will have achieved
PD status, regardless of the contribution of the missing lesion.
4.4.3.
Best overall response: all time points
The best overall response is determined once all the data for the
patient is known.
Best response determination in trials where conﬁrmation of com-
plete or partial response IS NOT required: Best response in these
trials is deﬁned as the best response across all time points (for
example, a patient who has SD at ﬁrst assessment, PR at sec-
ond assessment, and PD on last assessment has a best overall
response of PR). When SD is believed to be best response, it
must also meet the protocol speciﬁed minimum time from
baseline. If the minimum time is not met when SD is other-
wise the best time point response, the patient’s best response
depends on the subsequent assessments. For example, a pa-
tient who has SD at ﬁrst assessment, PD at second and does
not meet minimum duration for SD, will have a best response
of PD. The same patient lost to follow-up after the ﬁrst SD
assessment would be considered inevaluable.
l A ‘positive’ FDG-PET scan lesion means one which is FDG avid
with an uptake greater than twice that of the surrounding tissue
on the attenuation corrected image.
234
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7



---
[PAGE 8/20]

Best response determination in trials where conﬁrmation of com-
plete or partial response IS required: Complete or partial re-
sponses may be claimed only if the criteria for each are met
at a subsequent time point as speciﬁed in the protocol (gener-
ally 4 weeks later). In this circumstance, the best overall re-
sponse can be interpreted as in Table 3.
4.4.4.
Special notes on response assessment
When nodal disease is included in the sum of target lesions
and the nodes decrease to ‘normal’ size (<10 mm), they may
still have a measurement reported on scans. This measure-
ment should be recorded even though the nodes are normal
in order not to overstate progression should it be based on
increase in size of the nodes. As noted earlier, this means that
patients with CR may not have a total sum of ‘zero’ on the
case report form (CRF).
In trials where conﬁrmation of response is required, re-
peated ‘NE’ time point assessments may complicate best re-
sponse determination. The analysis plan for the trial must
address how missing data/assessments will be addressed in
determination of response and progression. For example, in
most trials it is reasonable to consider a patient with time
point responses of PR-NE-PR as a conﬁrmed response.
Patients with a global deterioration of health status requir-
ing discontinuation of treatment without objective evidence
of disease progression at that time should be reported as
‘symptomatic deterioration’. Every effort should be made to
document objective progression even after discontinuation
of treatment. Symptomatic deterioration is not a descriptor
of an objective response: it is a reason for stopping study ther-
apy. The objective response status of such patients is to be
determined by evaluation of target and non-target disease
as shown in Tables 1–3.
Conditions that deﬁne ‘early progression, early death and
inevaluability’ are study speciﬁc and should be clearly de-
scribed in each protocol (depending on treatment duration,
treatment periodicity).
In some circumstances it may be difﬁcult to distinguish
residual disease from normal tissue. When the evaluation of
complete response depends upon this determination, it is
recommended that the residual lesion be investigated (ﬁne
Table 3 – Best overall response when conﬁrmation of CR and PR required.
Overall response
Overall response
BEST overall response
First time point
Subsequent time point
CR
CR
CR
CR
PR
SD, PD or PRa
CR
SD
SD provided minimum criteria for SD duration met, otherwise, PD
CR
PD
SD provided minimum criteria for SD duration met, otherwise, PD
CR
NE
SD provided minimum criteria for SD duration met, otherwise NE
PR
CR
PR
PR
PR
PR
PR
SD
SD
PR
PD
SD provided minimum criteria for SD duration met, otherwise, PD
PR
NE
SD provided minimum criteria for SD duration met, otherwise NE
NE
NE
NE
CR = complete response, PR = partial response, SD = stable disease, PD = progressive disease, and NE = inevaluable.
a If a CR is truly met at ﬁrst time point, then any disease seen at a subsequent time point, even disease meeting PR criteria relative to baseline,
makes the disease PD at that point (since disease must have reappeared after CR). Best response would depend on whether minimum duration
for SD was met. However, sometimes ‘CR’ may be claimed when subsequent scans suggest small lesions were likely still present and in fact the
patient had PR, not CR at the ﬁrst time point. Under these circumstances, the original CR should be changed to PR and the best response is PR.
Table 1 – Time point response: patients with target (+/–
non-target) disease.
Target lesions
Non-target lesions
New
lesions
Overall
response
CR
CR
No
CR
CR
Non-CR/non-PD
No
PR
CR
Not evaluated
No
PR
PR
Non-PD or
not all evaluated
No
PR
SD
Non-PD or
not all evaluated
No
SD
Not all
evaluated
Non-PD
No
NE
PD
Any
Yes or No
PD
Any
PD
Yes or No
PD
Any
Any
Yes
PD
CR = complete response, PR = partial response, SD = stable disease,
PD = progressive disease, and NE = inevaluable.
Table 2 – Time point response: patients with non-target
disease only.
Non-target lesions
New lesions
Overall response
CR
No
CR
Non-CR/non-PD
No
Non-CR/non-PDa
Not all evaluated
No
NE
Unequivocal PD
Yes or No
PD
Any
Yes
PD
CR = complete
response,
PD = progressive
disease,
and
NE = inevaluable.
a ‘Non-CR/non-PD’ is preferred over ‘stable disease’ for non-target
disease since SD is increasingly used as endpoint for assessment
of efﬁcacy in some trials so to assign this category when no
lesions can be measured is not advised.
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
235



---
[PAGE 9/20]

needle aspirate/biopsy) before assigning a status of complete
response. FDG-PET may be used to upgrade a response to a CR
in a manner similar to a biopsy in cases where a residual
radiographic abnormality is thought to represent ﬁbrosis or
scarring. The use of FDG-PET in this circumstance should be
prospectively described in the protocol and supported by dis-
ease speciﬁc medical literature for the indication. However, it
must be acknowledged that both approaches may lead to
false positive CR due to limitations of FDG-PETand biopsy res-
olution/sensitivity.
For equivocal ﬁndings of progression (e.g. very small and
uncertain new lesions; cystic changes or necrosis in existing
lesions), treatment may continue until the next scheduled
assessment. If at the next scheduled assessment, progression
is conﬁrmed, the date of progression should be the earlier
date when progression was suspected.
4.5.
Frequency of tumour re-evaluation
Frequency
of
tumour
re-evaluation
while
on
treatment
should be protocol speciﬁc and adapted to the type and sche-
dule of treatment. However, in the context of phase II studies
where the beneﬁcial effect of therapy is not known, follow-up
every 6–8 weeks (timed to coincide with the end of a cycle) is
reasonable. Smaller or greater time intervals than these could
be justiﬁed in speciﬁc regimens or circumstances. The proto-
col should specify which organ sites are to be evaluated at
baseline (usually those most likely to be involved with meta-
static disease for the tumour type under study) and how often
evaluations are repeated. Normally, all target and non-target
sites are evaluated at each assessment. In selected circum-
stances certain non-target organs may be evaluated less fre-
quently. For example, bone scans may need to be repeated
only when complete response is identiﬁed in target disease
or when progression in bone is suspected.
After the end of the treatment, the need for repetitive tu-
mour evaluations depends on whether the trial has as a goal
the response rate or the time to an event (progression/death).
If ‘time to an event’ (e.g. time to progression, disease-free
survival, progression-free survival) is the main endpoint of
the study, then routine scheduled re-evaluation of protocol
speciﬁed sites of disease is warranted. In randomised com-
parative trials in particular, the scheduled assessments
should be performed as identiﬁed on a calendar schedule
(for example: every 6–8 weeks on treatment or every 3–4
months after treatment) and should not be affected by delays
in therapy, drug holidays or any other events that might lead
to imbalance in a treatment arm in the timing of disease
assessment.
4.6.
Conﬁrmatory measurement/duration of response
4.6.1.
Conﬁrmation
In non-randomised trials where response is the primary end-
point, conﬁrmation of PR and CR is required to ensure re-
sponses identiﬁed are not the result of measurement error.
This will also permit appropriate interpretation of results in
the context of historical data where response has traditionally
required conﬁrmation in such trials (see the paper by Bogaerts
et al. in this Special Issue10). However, in all other circum-
stances, i.e. in randomised trials (phase II or III) or studies
where stable disease or progression are the primary endpoints,
conﬁrmation ofresponseis notrequiredsince itwillnotaddva-
lue to theinterpretationoftrial results.However, eliminationof
the requirement for response conﬁrmation may increase the
importance of central review to protect against bias, in partic-
ular in studies which are not blinded.
In the case of SD, measurements must have met the SD
criteria at least once after study entry at a minimum interval
(in general not less than 6–8 weeks) that is deﬁned in the
study protocol.
4.6.2.
Duration of overall response
The duration of overall response is measured from the time
measurement criteria are ﬁrst met for CR/PR (whichever is ﬁrst
recorded) until the ﬁrst date that recurrent or progressive dis-
ease is objectively documented (taking as reference for progres-
sive disease the smallest measurements recorded on study).
The duration of overall complete response is measured
from the time measurement criteria are ﬁrst met for CR until
the ﬁrst date that recurrent disease is objectively documented.
4.6.3.
Duration of stable disease
Stable disease is measured from the start of the treatment (in
randomised trials, from date of randomisation) until the crite-
ria for progression are met, taking as reference the smallest
sum on study (if the baseline sum is the smallest, this is the
reference for calculation of PD).
The clinical relevance of the duration of stable disease var-
ies in different studies and diseases. If the proportion of pa-
tients achieving stable disease for a minimum period of time
is an endpoint of importance in a particular trial, the protocol
should specify the minimal time interval required between
two measurements for determination of stable disease.
Note: The duration of response and stable disease as well as
theprogression-free survivalareinﬂuencedby thefrequencyof
follow-up after baseline evaluation. It is not in the scope of this
guideline to deﬁne a standard follow-up frequency. The fre-
quency should take into account many parameters including
disease types and stages, treatment periodicity and standard
practice. However, these limitations of the precision of the
measured endpoint should be taken into account if compari-
sons between trials are to be made.
4.7.
Progression-free survival/proportion progression-free
4.7.1.
Phase II trials
This guideline is focused primarily on the use of objective re-
sponse endpoints for phase II trials. In some circumstances, ‘re-
sponse rate’ may not be the optimal method to assess the
potential anticancer activity of new agents/regimens. In such
cases ‘progression-free survival’ (PFS) or the ‘proportion pro-
gression-free’ at landmark time points, might be considered
appropriate alternatives to provide an initial signal of biologic
effect of new agents. It is clear, however, that in an uncontrolled
trial, these measures are subject to criticism since an appar-
ently promising observation may be related to biological factors
such as patient selectionand not theimpactof theintervention.
Thus, phase II screening trials utilising these endpoints are best
designed with a randomised control. Exceptions may exist
236
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7



---
[PAGE 10/20]

where the behaviour patterns of certain cancers are so consis-
tent (and usually consistently poor), that a non-randomised
trial is justiﬁable (see for example van Glabbeke et al.20). How-
ever, in these cases it will be essential to document with care
the basis for estimating the expected PFS or proportion progres-
sion-free in the absence of a treatment effect.
4.7.2.
Phase III trials
Phase III trials in advanced cancers are increasingly designed
to evaluate progression-free survival or time to progression as
the primary outcome of interest. Assessment of progression
is relatively straightforward if the protocol requires all pa-
tients to have measurable disease. However, restricting entry
to this subset of patients is subject to criticism: it may result
in a trial where the results are less likely to be generalisable if,
in the disease under study, a substantial proportion of pa-
tients would be excluded. Moreover, the restriction to entry
will slow recruitment to the study. Increasingly, therefore, tri-
als allow entry of both patients with measurable disease as
well as those with non-measurable disease only. In this cir-
cumstance, care must be taken to explicitly describe the ﬁnd-
ings which would qualify for progressive disease for those
patients without measurable lesions. Furthermore, in this set-
ting, protocols must indicate if the maximum number of re-
corded target lesions for those patients with measurable
disease may be relaxed from ﬁve to three (based on the data
found in Bogaerts et al.10 and Moskowitz et al.11). As found in
the ‘special notes on assessment of progression’, these guide-
lines offer recommendations for assessment of progression
in this setting. Furthermore, if available, validated tumour mar-
ker measures of progression (as has been proposed for ovarian
cancer) may be useful to integrate into the deﬁnition of pro-
gression. Centralised blinded review of imaging studies or of
source imaging reports to verify ‘unequivocal progression’
may be needed if important drug development or drug ap-
proval decisions are to be based on the study outcome. Finally,
as noted earlier, because the date of progression is subject to
ascertainment bias, timing of investigations in study arms
should be the same. The article by Dancey et al. in this special
issue21 provides a more detailed discussion of the assessment
of progression in randomised trials.
4.8.
Independent review of response and progression
For trials where objective response (CR + PR) is the primary end-
point, and in particular where key drug development deci-
sions are based on the observation of a minimum number of
responders, it is recommended that all claimed responses be
reviewed by an expert(s) independent of the study. If the study
is a randomised trial, ideally reviewers should be blinded to
treatment assignment. Simultaneous review of the patients’
ﬁles and radiological images is the best approach.
Independent review of progression presents some more
complex issues: for example, there are statistical problems
with the use of central-review-based progression time in
place of investigator-based progression time due to the poten-
tial introduction of informative censoring when the former
precedes the latter. An overview of these factors and other
lessons learned from independent review is provided in an
article by Ford et al. in this special issue.22
4.9.
Reporting best response results
4.9.1.
Phase II trials
When response is the primary endpoint, and thus all patients
must have measurable disease to enter the trial, all patients
included in the study must be accounted for in the report of
the results, even if there are major protocol treatment devia-
tions or if they are not evaluable. Each patient will be assigned
one of the following categories:
1. Complete response
2. Partial response
3. Stable disease
4. Progression
5. Inevaluable for response: specify reasons (for example: early
death, malignant disease; early death, toxicity; tumour
assessments not repeated/incomplete; other (specify)).
Normally, all eligible patients should be included in the
denominator for the calculation of the response rate for phase
II trials (in some protocols it will be appropriate to include all
treated patients). It is generally preferred that 95% two-sided
conﬁdence limits are given for the calculated response rate.
Trial conclusions should be based on the response rate for
all eligible (or all treated) patients and should not be based
on a selected ‘evaluable’ subset.
4.9.2.
Phase III trials
Response evaluation in phase III trials may be an indicator
of the relative anti-tumour activity of the treatments eval-
uated and is almost always a secondary endpoint. Ob-
served differences in response rate may not predict the
clinically relevant therapeutic beneﬁt for the population
studied. If objective response is selected as a primary end-
point for a phase III study (only in circumstances where a
direct relationship between objective tumour response and
a clinically relevant therapeutic beneﬁt can be unambigu-
ously demonstrated for the population studied), the same
criteria as those applying to phase II trials should be used
and all patients entered should have at least one measur-
able lesion.
In those many cases where response is a secondary end-
point and not all trial patients have measurable disease, the
method for reporting overall best response rates must be
pre-speciﬁed in the protocol. In practice, response rate may
be reported using either an ‘intent to treat’ analysis (all ran-
domised patients in the denominator) or an analysis where
only the subset of patients with measurable disease at
baseline are included. The protocol should clearly specify
how response results will be reported, including any subset
analyses that are planned.
The original version of RECIST suggested that in phase III
trials one could write protocols using a ‘relaxed’ interpreta-
tion of the RECIST guidelines (for example, reducing the num-
ber of lesions measured) but this should no longer be done
since these revised guidelines have been amended in such a
way that it is clear how these criteria should be applied for
all trials in which anatomical assessment of tumour response
or progression are endpoints.
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
237



---
[PAGE 11/20]

Appendix I. Summary of major changes RECIST 1.0 to RECIST 1.1
RECIST 1.0
RECIST 1.1
Rationale
Reference in special issue
(if applicable)
Minimum size measurable
lesions
CT: 10 mm spiral
CT 10 mm; delete reference to
spiral scan
Most scans used have 5 mm or less slice
thickness Clearer to give instruction based on
slice interval if it is greater than 5 mm
20 mm non-spiral
Clinical: 20 mm
Clinical: 10 mm (must be
measurable with calipers)
Caliper measurement will make this reliable
Lymph node: not mentioned
CT:
Since nodes are normal structure need to deﬁne
pathological enlargement. Short axis is most
sensitive
Schwartz et al.15
P15 mm short axis for target
P10–<15 mm for non-target
<10 mm is non-pathological
Special considerations on
lesion measurability
–
Notes included on bone
lesions, cystic lesions
Clarify frequently asked questions
Overall tumour burden
10 lesions (5 per organ)
5 lesions (2 per organ)
Data warehouse analysis shows no loss of
information if lesion number reduced from 10 to
5. A maximum of 2 lesions per organ yields
sufﬁcient representation per disease site
Bogaerts et al.10
Response criteria target
disease
CR lymph node not mentioned
CR lymph nodes must be
<10 mm short axis
In keeping with normal size of nodes
Schwartz et al.15
PD 20% increase over smallest sum on
study or new lesions
PD 20% increase over smallest
sum on study (including
baseline if that is smallest) and
at least 5 mm increase or new
lesions
Clariﬁcation that if baseline measurement is
smaller than any on study measurement, it is
reference against which PD is assessed
5 mm absolute increase to guard against over
calling PD when total sum is very small and 20%
increase is within measurement error
Response criteria non-target
disease
‘unequivocal progression’ considered as PD
More detailed description of
‘unequivocal progression’ to
indicate that it should not
normally trump target disease
status. It must be
representative of overall
disease status change, not a
single lesion increase
Confusion with RECIST 1.0 where some were
considering PD if ‘increase’ in any non-target
lesion, even when target disease is stable or
responding
New lesions
–
New section on New lesions
To provide guidance on when a lesion is
considered new (and thus PD)
Overall response
Table integrated target and non-target
lesions
Two tables: one integrating
target and non-target and the
other of non-target only
To account for the fact that RECIST criteria are
now being used in trials where PFS is the
endpoint and not all patients have measurable
(target) disease at baseline
Dancey et al.21
238
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7



---
[PAGE 12/20]

RECIST 1.0
RECIST 1.1
Rationale
Reference in special issue
(if applicable)
Special notes:
Frequently asked questions on these topics
How to assess and measure
lymph nodes
CR in face of residual tissue
Discussion of ‘equivocal’
progression
Conﬁrmatory measure
For CR and PR: criteria
must be met again 4
weeks after initial
documentation
Retain this requirement ONLY
for
non-randomised trials with
primary endpoint of response
Data warehouse shows that response rates
rise when conﬁrmation is eliminated, but
the only circumstance where this is
important is in trials where there is no
concurrent comparative control and where
this measure is the primary endpoint
Bogaerts et al.10
Progression-free survival
General comments only
More speciﬁc comments on
use of PFS (or proportion
progression-free) as
phase II endpoint
Increasing use of PFS in phase III trials
requires guidance on assessment of PD in
patients with non-measurable disease
Dancey et al.21
Greater detail on PFS
assessment in phase III trials
Reporting of response
results
9 categories suggested for
reporting phase II results
Divided into phase II and phase
III
Simpliﬁes reporting and clariﬁes how to
report phase II and III data consistently
9 categories collapsed into 5
In phase III, guidance given
about reporting response
Response in phase III
trials
More relaxed guidelines
possible if protocol speciﬁed
This section removed and
referenced in section
above: no need to have
different criteria for phase II
and III
Simpliﬁcation of response assessment by
reducing number of lesions and eliminating
need for conﬁrmation in randomised
studies where response is not the primary
endpoint makes separate ‘rules’
unnecessary
Imaging appendix
Appendix I
Appendix II: updated with
detailed guidance on
use of MRI, PET/CT
Evolving use of newer modalities addressed.
Enhanced guidance in response to frequent
questions and from radiology review
experience
Other practical guidance
included
New appendices
Appendix I: comparison of
RECIST 1.0 and 1.1
Appendix III: frequently asked
questions
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
239



---
[PAGE 13/20]

Conﬂict of interest statement
None declared.
Acknowledgements
The RECIST Working Group would like to thank the following
organisations which made data bases available to us in order
to perform the analyses which informed decisions about
changes to this version of the criteria: Amgen; AstraZeneca;
Breast Cancer International Research Group (BCIRG); Bristol-
Myers
Squibb; European
Organisation for
Research and
Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) Breast Cancer Group and Gas-
trointestinal
Group;
Erasmus
University
Medical
Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Genentech; Pﬁzer; RadPharm;
Roche; SanoﬁAventis.
We would also like to thank the following individuals from
academic, government, and pharmaceutical organisations for
providing helpful comments on an earlierdraft of these revised
guidelines: Ohad Amit, Phil Murphy, Teri Crofts and Janet Be-
gun, GlaxoSmithKline, USA; Laurence H. Baker, Southwest
Oncology Group, USA; Karla Ballman, Mayo Clinic, USA;
Charles Baum, Darrel Cohen, and Mary Ashford Collier, Pﬁzer,
USA; Gary J. Becker, American Board of Radiology, Tucson,
USA; Jean-Yves Blay, University Claude Pertrand, Lyon France;
Renzo Canetta, Bristol-Myers Squibb, USA; David Chang, Am-
gen Inc., USA; Sandra Chica, Perceptive Informations Inc. (PAR-
EXEL),
USA;
Martin
Edelman,
University
of
Maryland
Greenbaum Cancer Centre, USA; Gwendolyn Fyfe, Genentech,
USA; Bruce Giantonio, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group,
USA; Gary Gordon, Abbott Pharmaceuticals, USA; Ronald Gott-
lieb, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, USA; Simon Kao, University
of Iowa College of Medicine, USA; Wasaburo Koizumi, Kitasato
University, Japan; Alessandro Riva, Novartis Pharmaceuticals,
USA; Wayne Rackhoff, Ortho Biotech Oncology Research and
Development, USA; Nagahiro Saijo, President Japanese Society
of Medical Oncology, Japan; Mitchell Schnall American College
of Radiology Imaging Network, USA; Yoshik Shimamura, PAR-
EXEL International Inc., Japan; Rajeshwari Sridhara, Centre
for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administra-
tion, USA; Andrew Stone, Alan Barge, AstraZeneca, United
Kingdom; Orhan Suleiman, Centre for Drug Evaluation and Re-
search, Food and Drug Administration, USA; Daniel C. Sullivan,
Duke University Medical Centre, USA; Masakazu Toi, Kyoto
University, Japan; Cindy Welsh, Centre for Drug Evaluation
and Research, Food and Drug Administration, USA.
Finally, the RECIST Working Group would like to thank indi-
vidualswho were not permanent members of the group (which
are all acknowledged as co-authors) but who attended working
group meetings from time to time and made contributions to
the total process over the past 7 years: Richard Pazdur, Food
and Drug Administration, USA; Francesco Pignatti, European
Medicines Agency, London, UK.
Appendix II.
Speciﬁcations for standard
anatomical radiological imaging
These protocols for image acquisition of computed tomogra-
phy (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are recom-
mendations intended for patients on clinical trials where
RECIST assessment will be performed. Standardisation of
imaging requirements and image acquisition parameters is
ideal to allow for optimal comparability of subjects within a
study and results between studies. These recommendations
are designed to balance optimised image acquisition proto-
cols with techniques that should be feasible to perform glob-
ally at imaging facilities in all types of radiology practices.
These guidelines are not applicable to functional imaging
techniques or volumetric assessment of tumour size.
Scanner quality control is highly recommended and should
follow
standard
manufacturer
and
facility
maintenance
schedules using commercial phantoms. It is likely that for RE-
CIST unidimensional measurements this will be adequate to
produce reproducible measurements. Imaging quality control
for CT includes an analysis of image noise and uniformity and
CT number as well as spatial resolution. The frequency of
quality control analysis is also variable and should focus on
clinically relevant scanning parameters. Dose analysis is al-
ways important and the use of imaging should follow the
ALARA principle, ‘As Low As Reasonably Achievable’, which
refers to making every reasonable effort to maintain radiation
exposures as far below the dose limits as possible.
Speciﬁc.notes
Chest X-ray measurement of lesions surrounded by pulmon-
ary
parenchyma
is
feasible,
but
not
preferable
as
the
measurement represents a summation of densities. Further-
more, there is poor identiﬁcation of new lesions within the
chest on X-ray as compared with CT. Therefore, measure-
ments of pulmonary parenchymal lesions as well as medias-
tinal disease are optimally performed with CT of the chest.
MRI of the chest should only be performed in extenuating cir-
cumstances. Even if IV contrast cannot be administered (for
example, in the situation of allergy to contrast), a non-con-
trast CT of the chest is still preferred over MRI or chest X-ray.
CT scans: CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis should
be contiguous throughout all the anatomic region of interest.
As a general rule, the minimum size of a measurable lesion at
baseline should be no less than double the slice thickness and
also have a minimum size of 10 mm (see below for minimum
size when scanners have a slice thickness more than 5 mm).
While the precise physics of lesion size and partial volume
averaging is complex, lesions smaller than 10 mm may be dif-
ﬁcult to accurately and reproducibly measure. While this rule
is applicable to baseline scans, as lesions potentially decrease
in size at follow-up CT studies, they should still be measured.
Lesions which are reported as ‘too small to measure’ should
be assigned a default measurement of 5 mm if they are still
visible.
The most critical CT image acquisition parameters for opti-
mal tumour evaluation using RECIST are anatomic coverage,
contrast administration, slice thickness, and reconstruction interval.
a. Anatomic coverage: Optimal anatomic coverage for most
solid tumours is the chest, abdomen and pelvis. Cover-
age should encompass all areas of known predilection
for metastases in the disease under evaluation and
240
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7



---
[PAGE 14/20]

should additionally investigate areas that may be
involved based on signs and symptoms of individual
patients. Because a lesion later identiﬁed in a body part
not scanned at baseline would be considered as a new
lesion representing disease progression, careful consid-
eration should begiven to the extent of imaging coverage
at baseline and at subsequent follow-up time points.
This will enable better consistency not only of tumour
measurements but also identiﬁcation of new disease.
b. IV contrast administration: Optimal visualisation and
measurement of metastases in solid tumours requires
consistent administration (dose and rate) of IV contrast
as well as timing of scanning. Typically, most abdomi-
nal imaging is performed during the portal venous
phase and (optimally) about the same time frame after
injection on each examination (see Fig. 1 for impact of
different phase of IV contrast on lesion measurement).
Most solid tumours may be scanned with a single
phase after administration of contrast. While triphasic
CT scans are sometimes performed on other types of
vascular tumours to improve lesion conspicuity, for
consistency and uniformity, we would recommend tri-
phasic
CT
for
hepatocellular
and
neuroendocrine
tumours for which this scanning protocol is generally
standard of care, and the improved temporal resolution
of the triphasic scan will enhance the radiologists’ abil-
ity to consistently and reproducibly measure these
lesions. The precise dose and rate of IV contrast is
dependent upon the CT scanning equipment, CT acqui-
sition protocol, the type of contrast used, the available
venous
access
and
the
medical
condition
of
the
patient. Therefore, the method of administration of
intravenous contrast agents is variable. Rather than
try to institute rigid rules regarding methods for
administering contrast agents and the volume injected,
it is appropriate to suggest that an adequate volume of
a suitable contrast agent should be given so that the
metastases are demonstrated to best effect and a con-
sistent method is used on subsequent examinations for
any given patient (ideally, this would be speciﬁed in
the protocol or for an institution). It is very important
that the same technique be used at baseline and on fol-
low-up examinations for a given patient. This will
greatly enhance the reproducibility of the tumour mea-
surements. If prior to enrolment it is known a patient is
not able to undergo CT scans with IV contrast due to
allergy
or
renal
insufﬁciency,
the
decision
as
to
whether a non-contrast CT or MRI (with or without IV
contrast) should be used to evaluate the subject at
baseline and follow-up should be guided by the tumour
type under investigation and the anatomic location of
the disease. For patients who develop contraindica-
tions to contrast after baseline contrast CT is done,
the decision as to whether non-contrast CT or MRI
(enhanced or non-enhanced) should be performed
should also be based on the tumour type, anatomic
location of the disease and should be optimised to
allow for comparison to the prior studies if possible.
Each case should be discussed with the radiologist to
determine if substitution of these other approaches is
possible and, if not, the patient should be considered
not evaluable from that point forward. Care must be
taken in measurement of target lesions on a different
modality and interpretation of non-target disease or
new lesions, since the same lesion may appear to have
a different size using a new modality (see Fig. 2 for a
comparison of CT and MRI of the same lesion). Oral
contrast is recommended to help visualise and differ-
entiate structures in the abdomen.
c. Slice thickness and reconstruction interval: RECIST measure-
ments may be performed at most clinically obtained
slice thicknesses. It is recommended that CT scans be
performed at 5 mm contiguous slice thickness or less
and indeed this guideline presumes a minimum 5 mm
thickness in recommendations for measurable lesion
deﬁnition. Indeed, variations in slice thickness can have
an impact on lesion measurement and on detection of
new lesions. However, consideration should also be
given for minimising radiation exposure. With these
parameters, a minimum 10 mm lesion is considered
measurable at baseline. Occasionally, institutions may
perform medically acceptable scans at slice thicknesses
greater than 5 mm. If this occurs, the minimum size of
measurable lesions at baseline should be twice the slice
Fig. 1 – Difference in measurement/visualisation with different phases of IV contrast administration. Hypervascular
metastases imaged in the arterial phase (left) and the portal venous phase (right). Note that the number of lesions visible
differs greatly between the two phases of contrast administration as does any potential lesion measurement. Consistent CT
scan acquisition, including phase of contrast administration, is important for optimal and reproducible tumour
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
241



---
[PAGE 15/20]

thickness of the baseline scans. Most contemporary CT
scanners are multidetector which have many imaging
options for these acquisition parameters.23 The equip-
ment vendor and scanning manual should be reviewed
if there are any speciﬁc system questions.
d. Alternative contrast agents: There are a number of other,
new contrast agents, some organ speciﬁc.24 They may
be used as part of patient care for instance, in liver
lesion assessment, or lymph node characterisation25,
but should not as yet be used in clinical trials.
FDG-PET has gained acceptance as a valuable tool for
detecting, staging and restaging several malignancies. Criteria
for incorporating (or substituting) FDG-PET into anatomical
assessment of tumour response in phase II trials are not yet
available, though much research is ongoing. Nevertheless,
FDG-PET is being used in many drug development trials both
as a tool to assess therapeutic efﬁcacy and also in assessment
of progression. If FDG-PET scans are included in a protocol, by
consensus, an FDG uptake period of 60 min prior to imaging
has been decided as the most appropriate for imaging of pa-
tients with malignancy.26 Whole-body acquisition is impor-
tant since this allows for sampling of all areas of interest
and can assess if new lesions have appeared thus determining
the possibility of interval progression of disease. Images from
the base of the skull to the level of the mid-thigh should be ob-
tained 60 min post injection. PET camera speciﬁcations are
variable and manufacturer speciﬁc, so every attempt should
be made to use the same scanner, or the same model scanner,
for serial scans on the same patient. Whole-body acquisitions
can be performed in either 2- or 3-dimensional mode with
attenuation correction, but the method chosen should be con-
sistent across all patients and serial scans in the clinical trial.
PET/CT scans: Combined modality scanning such as with
PET–CT is increasingly used in clinical care, and is a modal-
ity/technology that is in rapid evolution; therefore, the recom-
mendations in this paper may change rather quickly with
time. At present, low dose or attenuation correction CT por-
tions of a combined PET–CT are of limited use in anatomically
based efﬁcacy assessments and it is therefore suggested that
they should not be substituted for dedicated diagnostic con-
trast enhanced CT scans for anatomically based RECIST mea-
surements. However, if a site can document that the CT
performed as part of a PET–CT is of identical diagnostic qual-
ity to a diagnostic CT (with IV and oral contrast) then the CT
portion of the PET–CT can be used for RECIST measurements.
Note, however, that the PET portion of the CT introduces addi-
tional data which may bias an investigator if it is not routinely
or serially performed.
Ultrasound examinations should not be used in clinical trials
to measure tumour regression or progression of lesions be-
cause the examination is necessarily subjective and operator
dependent. The reasons for this are several: Entire examina-
tions cannot be reproduced for independent review at a later
date, and it must be assumed, whether or not it is the case,
that the hard-copy ﬁlms available represent a true and accu-
rate reﬂection of events. Furthermore, if, for example, the
only measurable lesion is in the para-aortic region of the
abdomen and if gas in the bowel overlies the lesion, the lesion
will not be detected because the ultrasound beam cannot
penetrate the gas. Accordingly, the disease staging (or restag-
ing for treatment evaluation) for this patient will not be
accurate.
While evaluation of lesions by physical examination is also
of limited reproducibility, it is permitted when lesions are
superﬁcial, at least 10 mm size, and can be assessed using
calipers. In general, it is preferred if patients on clinical trials
have at least one lesion that is measurable by CT. Other skin
or palpable lesions may be measured on physical examina-
tion and be considered target lesions.
Use of MRI remains a complex issue. MRI has excellent
contrast, spatial and temporal resolution; however, there
are many image acquisition variables involved in MRI, which
greatly impact image quality, lesion conspicuity and mea-
surement. Furthermore, the availability of MRI is variable
globally. As with CT, if an MRI is performed, the technical
speciﬁcations of the scanning sequences used should be
optimised for the evaluation of the type and site of disease.
Furthermore, as with CT, the modality used at follow-up
should be the same as was used at baseline and the lesions
should be measured/assessed on the same pulse sequence.
Generally, axial imaging of the abdomen and pelvis with T1
and T2 weighted imaging along with gadolinium enhanced
imaging should be performed. The ﬁeld of view, matrix,
number of excitations, phase encode steps, use of fat sup-
pression and fast sequences should be optimised for the spe-
Fig. 2 – CT versus MRI of same lesions showing apparent ‘progression’ due only to differing method of measurement.
242
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7



---
[PAGE 16/20]

ciﬁc body part being imaged as well as the scanner utilised. It
is beyond the scope of this document or appendix to pre-
scribe speciﬁc MRI pulse sequence parameters for all scan-
ners, body parts and diseases. Ideally, the same type of
scanner should be used and the image acquisition protocol
should be followed as closely as possible to prior scans. Body
scans should be performed with breath-hold scanning tech-
niques if possible.
Selection of target lesions: In general, the largest lesions rep-
resentative of involved organs (up to a maximum of two per
organ and ﬁve total) are selected to follow as target lesions.
However, in some cases, the largest lesions may not be easily
measured and are not suitable for follow-up because of their
conﬁguration. In these cases, identiﬁcation of the largest most
reproducible lesions is advised. Fig. 3 provides an illustrative
example where the largest lesion is not the most reproducible
and another lesion is better to select and follow:
Measurement of lesions
The longest diameter of selected lesions should be measured
in the plane in which the images were acquired. For body CT,
this is the axial plane. In the event isotropic reconstructions
are performed, measurements can be made on these recon-
structed images; however, it should be cautioned that not
all radiology sites are capable of producing isotropic recon-
structions. This could lead to the undesirable situation of
measurements in the axial plane at one assessment point
and in a different plane at a subsequent assessment. There
are some tumours, for instance paraspinal lesions, which
are better measured in the coronal or sagittal plane. It would
be acceptable to measure these lesions in these planes if the
reconstructions in those planes were isotropic or the images
were acquired with MRI in those planes. Using the same plane
of evaluation, the maximal diameter of each target lesion
should always be measured at subsequent follow-up time
points even if this results in measuring the lesion at a differ-
ent slice level or in a different orientation or vector compared
with the baseline study. Software tools that calculate the
maximal diameter for a perimeter of a tumour may be em-
ployed and may even reduce variability.
The only exception to the longest diameter rule is lymph
node measurement. Because malignant nodes are identiﬁed
by the length of their short axis, this is the guide used to
determine not only whether they are pathological but is also
the dimension measured for adding into the sum of target le-
sions. Fig. 4 illustrates this point: the large arrow identiﬁes a
malignant node: the shorter perpendicular axis is P15 mm
and will be recorded. Close by (small arrow) there is a normal
node: note here the long axis is greater than 10 mm but the
short axis is well below 10 mm. This node should be consid-
ered non-pathological.
If a lesion disappears and reappears at a subsequent time
point it should continue to be measured. However, the pa-
tient’s response at the point in time when the lesion reap-
pears will depend upon the status of his/her other lesions.
For example, if the patient’s tumour had reached a CR status
and the lesion reappeared, then the patient would be consid-
ered PD at the time of reappearance. In contrast, if the tumour
status was a PR or SD and one lesion which had disappeared
then reappears, its maximal diameter should be added to the
sum of the remaining lesions for a calculated response: in
other words, the reappearance of an apparently ‘disappeared’
single lesion amongst many which remain is not in itself en-
Fig. 3 – Largest lesion may not be most reproducible: most reproducible should be selected as target. In this example, the
primary gastric lesion (circled at baseline and at follow-up in the top two images) may be able to be measured with thin
section volumetric CT with the same degree of gastric distention at baseline and follow-up. However, this is potentially
challenging to reproduce in a multicentre trial and if attempted should be done with careful imaging input and analysis. The
most reproducible lesion is a lymph node (circled at baseline and at follow-up in the bottom two images).
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
243



---
[PAGE 17/20]

ough to qualify for PD: that requires the sum of all lesions to
meet the PD criteria. The rationale for such a categorisation is
based upon the realisation that most lesions do not actually
‘disappear’ but are not visualised because they are beyond
the resolving power of the imaging modality employed.
The identiﬁcation of the precise boundary deﬁnition of a
lesion may be difﬁcult especially when the lesion is embed-
ded in an organ with a similar contrast such as the liver, pan-
creas, kidney, adrenal or spleen. Additionally, peritumoural
oedema may surround a lesion and may be difﬁcult to distin-
guish on certain modalities between this oedema and actual
tumour. In fact, pathologically, the presence of tumour cells
within the oedema region is variable. Therefore, it is most
critical that the measurements be obtained in a reproducible
manner from baseline and all subsequent follow-up time-
points. This is also a strong reason to consistently utilise
the same imaging modality.
When lesions ‘fragment’, the individual lesion diameters
should be added together to calculate the target lesion
sum. Similarly, as lesions coalesce, a plane between them
may be maintained that would aid in obtaining maximal
diameter measurements of each individual lesion. If the le-
sions have truly coalesced such that they are no longer sep-
arable, the vector of the longest diameter in this instance
should be the maximal longest diameter for the ‘merged
lesion’.
Progression of non-target lesions
To achieve ‘unequivocal progression’ there must be an overall
level of substantial worsening in non-target disease that is of
a magnitude that, even in the presence of SD or PR in target
disease, the treating physician would feel it important to
change therapy. Examples of unequivocal progression are
shown in Figs. 5 and 6.
Fig. 5 – Example of unequivocal progression in non-target lesions in liver.
Fig. 6 – Example of unequivocal progression in non-target lesion (nodes).
Fig. 4 – Lymph node assessment: large arrow illustrates a
pathological node with the short axis shown as a solid line
which should be measured and followed. Small arrow illus-
trates a non-pathological node which has a short axis
<10 mm.
244
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7



---
[PAGE 18/20]

Appendix III. Frequently asked questions
Question
Answer
What should be done if several unique lesions at
baseline become conﬂuent at a follow-up
evaluation?
Measure the longest diameter of the conﬂuent mass and record to add into the sum of
the longest diameters
How large does a new lesion have to be to count
as progression? Does any small subcentimetre
lesion qualify, or should the lesion be at least
measurable?
New lesions do not need to meet ‘measurability criteria’ to be considered valid. If it is
clear on previous images (with the same technique) that a lesion was absent then its
deﬁnitive appearance implies progression. If there is any doubt (because of the
techniques or conditions) then it is suggested that treatment continue until next
scheduled assessment when, generally, all should be clear. Either it gets bigger and the
date of progression is the date of the ﬁrst suspicion, or it disappears and one may then
consider it an artefact with the support of the radiologists
How should one lesion be measured if on
subsequent exams it is split into two?
Measure the longest diameter of each lesion and add this into the sum
Does the deﬁnition of progression depend on
the status of all target lesions or only one?
As per the RECIST 1.1 guideline, progression requires a 20% increase in the sum of
diameters of all target lesions AND a minimum absolute increase of 5 mm in the sum
Are RECIST criteria accepted by regulatory
agencies?
Many cooperative groups and members of pharma were involved in preparing RECIST
1.0 and have adopted them. The FDA was consulted in their development and supports
their use, though they don’t require it. The European and Canadian regulatory
authorities also participated and the RECIST criteria are now integrated in the European
note for guidance for the development of anticancer agents. Many pharmaceutical
companies are also using them. RECIST 1.1 was similarly widely distributed before
publication
What is the criterion for a measurable lesion if
the CT slice thickness is >5 mm?
RECIST 1.1 recommends that CT scans have a maximum slice thickness of 5 mm and the
minimum size for a measurable lesion is twice that: 10 mm (even if slice thickness is
<5 mm). If scanners with slice thickness >5 mm are used, the minimum lesion size must
have a longest diameter twice the actual slice thickness
What should we record when target lesions
become so small they are below the 10 mm
‘measurable’ size?
Target lesion measurability is deﬁned at baseline. Thereafter, actual measurements,
even if <10 mm, should be recorded. If lesions become very small, some radiologists
indicate they are ‘too small to measure’. This guideline advises that when this occurs, if
the lesion is actually still present, a default measurement of 5 mm should be applied. If
in fact the radiologist believes the lesion has gone, a default measurement of 0 mm
should be recorded
If a patient has several lesions which have
decreased in size to meet PR criteria and one
has actually disappeared, does that patient have
PD if the ‘disappeared’ lesion reappears?
Unless the sum meets the PD criteria, the reappearance of a lesion in the setting of PR (or
SD) is not PD. The lesion should simply be added into the sum.
If the patients had had a CR, clearly reappearance of an absent lesion would qualify for
PD
When measuring the longest diameter of target
lesions in response to treatment, is the same
axis that was used initially used subsequently,
even if there is a shape change to the lesion that
may have produced a new longest diameter?
The longest diameter of the lesion should always be measured even if the actual axis is
different from the one used to measure the lesion initially (or at different time point
during follow-up)
The only exception to this is lymph nodes: as per RECIST 1.1 the short axis should
always be followed and as in the case of target lesions, the vector of the short axis may
change on follow-up
Target lesions have been selected at baseline
and followed but then one of these target
lesions then becomes non-evaluable (i.e.
different technique used)
What may be done in such cases is one of the following:
What is the effect this has on the other target
lesions and the overall response?
(a) If the patient is still being treated, call the centre to be sure that future evaluations are
done with the baseline technique so at least SOME courses are fully evaluable
(b) If that is not possible, check if there IS a baseline exam by the same technique which
was used to follow patients...in which case if you retrieve the baseline measures from
that technique you retrieve the lesion evaluability
(c) If neither (a) nor (b) is possible then it is a judgement call about whether you delete
the lesion from all forms or consider the impact of the lesion overall is so important that
its being non-evaluable makes the overall response interpretation inevaluable without
it. Such a decision should be discussed in a review panel
It is NOT recommended that the lesion be included in baseline sums and then excluded
from follow-up sums since this biases in favour of a response
(continued on next page)
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
245



---
[PAGE 19/20]

R E F E R E N C E S
1. Paesmans M, Sculier JP, Libert P, et al. Response to
chemotherapy has predictive value for further survival of
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer: 10 years
experience of the European Lung Cancer Working Party. Eur J
Cancer 1997;33:2326–32.
2. Buyse M, Thirion P, Carlson RW, et al. Relation between tumor
response to ﬁrst-line chemotherapy and survival in advanced
colorectal cancer: a meta-analysis. Meta-analysis group in
Cancer. Lancet 2000;356:373–8.
3. Gofﬁn J, Baral S, Tu D, et al. Objective responses in patients
with malignant melanoma or renal cell cancer in early
clinical studies do not predict regulatory approval. Clin Cancer
Res 2005;15:5928–34.
4. El-Maraghi RH, Eisenhauer EA. Review of phase II trial designs
used in studies of molecular targeted agents: outcomes and
predictors of success in phase III. J Clin Oncol 2008;10:1346–54.
5. Miller AB, Hoogstraten B, Staquet M, Winkler A. Reporting
results of cancer treatment. Cancer 1981;47:207–14.
6. Tonkin K, Tritchler D, Tannock I. Criteria of tumor response
used in clinical trials of chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol
1985;3:870–5.
7. Baar J, Tannock I. Analyzing the same data in two ways: a
demonstration model to illustrate the reporting and
misreporting of clinical trials. J Clin Oncol 1989;7:969–78.
8. Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines
to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors (RECIST
Guidelines). J Natl Cancer Inst 2000;92:205–16.
9. Therasse P, Eisenhauer EA, Verweij J. RECIST revisited: a
review of validation studies on tumour assessment. Eur J
Cancer 2006;42:1031–9.
10. Bogaerts J, Ford R, Sargent D, et al. Individual patient
data analysis to assess modiﬁcations to the RECIST criteria.
Eur J Cancer 2009;45:248–60.
11. Moskowitz CS, Jia X, Schwartz LH, Go¨nen M. A simulation
study to evaluate the impact of the number of lesions
measured on response assessment. Eur J Cancer
2009;45:300–10.
12. Sargent D, Rubinstein L, Schwartz L, et al. Validation of novel
imaging methodologies for use as cancer clinical trials
end-points. Eur J Cancer 2009;45:290–9.
Appendix III – continued
Question
Answer
What if a single non-target lesion cannot be reviewed, for
whatever reason; does this negate the overall assessment?
Sometimes the major contribution of a single non-target lesion may be in
the setting of CR having otherwise been achieved: failure to examine one
non-target in that setting will leave you unable to claim CR. It is also
possible that the non-target lesion has undergone such substantial
progression that it would override the target disease and render patient
PD. However, this is very unlikely, especially if the rest of the measurable
disease is stable or responding
A patient has a 32% decrease in sum cycle 2, a 28% decrease cycle
4 and a 33% decrease cycle 6. Does conﬁrmation of PR have to
take place in sequential scans or is a case like this conﬁrmed PR?
It is not infrequent that tumour shrinkage hovers around the 30% mark.
In this case, most would consider PR to have been conﬁrmed looking at
this overall case. Had there been two or three non-PR observations
between the two time point PR responses, the most conservative
approach would be to consider this case SD
In the setting of a breast cancer neoadjuvant study, would
mammography not be used to assess lesions? Is CT preferred in
this setting?
Neither CT nor mammography are optimal in this setting. MRI is the
preferred modality to follow breast lesions in a neoadjuvant setting
A patient has a lesion measurable by clinical exam and by CT
scan. Which should be followed?
CT scan. Always follow by imaging if that option exists since it can be
reviewed and veriﬁed
A lesion which was solid at baseline has become necrotic in the
centre. How should this be measured?
The longest diameter of the entire lesion should be followed. Eventually,
necrotic lesions which are responding to treatment decrease in size. In
reporting the results of trials, you may wish to report on this
phenomenon if it is seen frequently since some agents (e.g. angiogenesis
inhibitors) may produce this effect
If I am going to use MRI to follow disease, what is minimum size
for measurability?
MRI may be substituted for contrast enhanced CT for some sites, but not
lung. The minimum size for measurability is the same as for CT (10 mm)
as long as the scans are performed with slice thickness of 5 mm and no
gap. In the event the MRI is performed with thicker slices, the size of a
measurable lesion at baseline should be two times the slice thickness. In
the event there are inter-slice gaps, this also needs to be considered in
determining the size of measurable lesions at baseline
Can PET–CT be used with RECIST?
At present, the low dose or attenuation correction CT portion of a
combined PET–CT is not always of optimal diagnostic CT quality for use
with RECIST measurements. However, if your site has documented that
the CT performed as part of a PET–CT is of the same diagnostic quality as
a diagnostic CT (with IV and oral contrast) then the PET–CT can be used
for RECIST measurements. Note, however, that the PET portion of the CT
introduces additional data which may bias an investigator if it is not
routinely or serially performed
246
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7



---
[PAGE 20/20]

13. Macdonald DR, Cascino TL, Schold Jr SC, Cairncross JG.
Response criteria for phase II studies of supratentorial
malignant glioma. J Clin Oncol 1990;8:1277–80.
14. Cheson BD, Pﬁstner B, Juweid ME, et al. Revised response
criteria for malignant lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 2007;10:579–86.
15. Schwartz LH, Bogaerts J, Ford R, et al. Evaluation of lymph
nodes with RECIST 1.1. Eur J Cancer 2009;45:261–7.
16. Rustin GJ, Quinn M, Thigpen T, et al. Re: New guidelines to
evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors (ovarian
cancer). J Natl Cancer Inst 2004;96:487–8.
17. Bubley GJ, Carducci M, Dahut W, et al. Eligibility and response
guidelines for phase II clinical trials in androgen-independent
prostate cancer: recommendations from the Prostate-Speciﬁc
Antigen Working Group. J Clin Oncol 1999;17:3461–7.
18. Scher H, Halabi S, Tannock I, et al. Design and end points of
clinical trials for patients with progressive prostate cancer
and castrate levels of testosterone: recommendations of the
Prostate Cancer Clinical Trials Working Group. J Clin Oncol
2008;26:1148–59.
19. Vergote I, Rustin GJ, Eisenhauer EA, et al. Re: new guidelines
to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors [ovarian
cancer]. Gynecologic Cancer Intergroup. J Natl Cancer Inst
2000;92:1534–5.
20. Van Glabbeke M, Verweij J, Judson I, Nielsen OS. EORTC Soft
Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group: Progression-free rate as the
principal end-point for phase II trials in soft-tissue sarcomas.
Eur J Cancer 2002;38:543–9.
21. Dancey JE, Dodd LE, Ford R, et al. Recommendations for the
assessment of progression in randomised cancer treatment
trials. Eur J Cancer 2009;45:281–9.
22. Ford R, Schwartz L, Dancey J, et al. Lessons learned
from independent central review. Eur J Cancer 2009;45:
268–74.
23. Catalano C, Francone M, Ascarelli A, Mangia M, Iacucci I,
Passariello R. Optimizing radiation dose and image quality.
Eur Radiol 2007;17(Suppl 6):F26–32.
24. Low RN. Abdominal MRI advances in the detection of liver
tumours and characterization. Lancet Oncol 2007;8(6):525–35.
25. Barrett T, Choyke PL, Kobayashi H. Imaging of the lymphatic
system: new horizons. Contrast Media Mol Imaging
2006;1(6):230–45.
26. Shankar LK, Hoffman JM, Bacharach S, et al. National
Cancer Institute. Consensus recommendations for the use
of 18F-FDG PET as an indicator of therapeutic response
in patients in National Cancer Institute Trials.
J Nucl Med 2006;47(6):1059–66.
E U R O P E A N J O U R N A L O F C A N C E R 4 5 ( 2 0 0 9 ) 2 2 8 –2 4 7
247

