# EANM


---
[PAGE 1/17]

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00259-021-05450-9
GUIDELINES
EANM guideline on the role of 2‑[18F]FDG PET/CT in diagnosis, staging,
prognostic value, therapy assessment and restaging of ovarian cancer,
endorsed by the American College of Nuclear Medicine (ACNM),
the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging (SNMMI)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
Roberto C. Delgado Bolton1   · Nicolas Aide2,3   · Patrick M. Colletti4   · Annamaria Ferrero5   · Diana Paez6   ·
Andrea Skanjeti7   · Francesco Giammarile6,8 
Received: 5 May 2021 / Accepted: 3 June 2021
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
In most patients with ovarian carcinoma, the diagnosis is reached when the disease is long past the initial stages, presenting already an
advanced stage, and they usually have a very bad prognosis. Cytoreductive or debulking surgical procedures, platinum-based chemotherapy
and targeted agents are key therapeutic elements. However, around 7 out of 10 patients present recurrent disease within 36 months from
the initial diagnosis. The metastatic spread in ovarian cancer follows three pathways: contiguous dissemination across the peritoneum,
dissemination through the lymphatic drainage and, although less importantly in this case, through the bloodstream. Radiological imaging,
including ultrasound, CT and MRI, are the main imaging techniques in which management decisions are supported, CT being considered
the best available technique for presurgical evaluation and staging purposes. Regarding 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT, the evidence available in the
literature demonstrates efficacy in primary detection, disease staging and establishing the prognosis and especially for relapse detection.
There is limited evidence when considering the evaluation of therapeutic response. This guideline summarizes the level of evidence and
grade of recommendation for the clinical indications of 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT in each disease stage of ovarian carcinoma.
Keywords  Ovarian cancer · Imaging · PET/CT · 18F-FDG · Guideline · Clinical indications
Abbreviations
2-[18F]FDG
2-[18F]Fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose
AOC
Advanced ovarian cancer
BOT
Borderline ovarian tumour
CEA
Serum carcinoembryonic antigen
CT
Computed tomography
ceCT
Contrast-enhanced computed
tomography
EOC
Early-stage ovarian carcinoma
EORTC​
European Organisation for Research
and Treatment of Cancer
ESMO
European Society of Medical Oncology
ESGO
European Society of Gynaecological
Oncology
FIGO
International Federation of Gynaecol-
ogy and Obstetrics
IAEA
International Atomic Energy Agency
IOTA
International Ovarian Tumour Analysis
group
LBM
Lean body mass
LGSC
Low-grade serous carcinoma
PCI
Peritoneal cancer index
PET
Positron emission tomography
MATV or MTV
Metabolic active tumour volume
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
sBOT(s)
Serous borderline ovarian tumour(s)
Participating associations  EANM: Roberto C. Delgado Bolton,
Nicolas Aide, and Francesco Giammarile
IAEA: Francesco Giammarile and Diana Paez
ACNM and SNMMI: Patrick M. Colletti
Endorsements  IAEA: endorsed 04/2021
ACNM: endorsed 04/2021
SNMMI: endorsed 04/2021
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Oncology -
Genitourinary
 *	 Roberto C. Delgado Bolton

rbiolton@gmail.com
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
/ Published online: 3 July 2021
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging (2021) 48:3286–3302
1 3



---
[PAGE 2/17]

SUL
Standardized uptake value using lean
body mass (LBM)
SUV
Standardized uptake value
TAUS
Transabdominal ultrasound
TLG
Total lesion glycolysis
TVUS
Transvaginal ultrasound
US
Ultrasound or echography
VOI
Volume of interest
WHO
World Health Organization
Preamble
The European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM)
is a professional non-profit medical association that facili-
tates communication worldwide among individuals pursu-
ing clinical and research excellence in nuclear medicine.
The EANM was founded in 1985.
These guidelines are intended to assist practitioners in provid-
ing appropriate nuclear medicine care for patients. They are not
inflexible rules or requirements of practice and are not intended,
nor should they be used, to establish a legal standard of care.
The ultimate judgement regarding the propriety of any specific pro-
cedure or course of action must be made by medical professionals tak-
ing into account the unique circumstances of each case. Thus, there is
no implication that an approach differing from the guidelines, standing
alone, is below the standard of care. To the contrary, a conscientious
practitioner may responsibly adopt a course of action different from that
set out in the guidelines when, in the reasonable judgement of the prac-
titioner, such course of action is indicated by the condition of the patient,
limitations of available resources or advances in knowledge or technol-
ogy subsequent to publication of the guidelines.
The practice of medicine involves not only the science
but also the art of dealing with the prevention, diagnosis,
alleviation and treatment of disease.
The variety and complexity of human conditions make it
impossible to always reach the most appropriate diagnosis or to
predict with certainty a particular response to treatment. There-
fore, it should be recognized that adherence to these guidelines
will not ensure an accurate diagnosis or a successful outcome.
All that should be expected is that the practitioner will follow a
reasonable course of action based on current knowledge, avail-
able resources and the needs of the patient to deliver effective
and safe medical care. The sole purpose of these guidelines is to
assist practitioners in achieving this objective.
Introduction
In most patients with ovarian carcinoma, the diagnosis is
reached when the disease is long past the initial stages,
presenting already an advanced stage, and they usually
have a very bad prognosis. Radiological imaging, includ-
ing ultrasound, CT and MRI, are the main imaging tech-
niques in which management decisions are supported.
Regarding 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT, the evidence available
in the literature demonstrates efficacy in primary detec-
tion, disease staging and establishing the prognosis and
especially for relapse detection. There is limited evidence
when considering the evaluation of therapeutic response.
This guideline summarizes the level of evidence and grade
of recommendation for the clinical indications of 2-[18F]
FDG PET/CT in each disease stage of ovarian carcinoma.
Background
Epidemiology
Worldwide data shows that ovarian tumours are among those
with high incidence (seventh largest) and are responsible
for a high number of cancer-related deaths (eighth highest)
[1–3]. Although global incidence rates remain stable over
time, in some Eastern Europeans countries, its incidence is
the highest [1], and in South-Central Asia, this tumour is the
third cause in cancer-related deaths [4]. Globally, 295,400
estimated new cases and 184,800 cancer-related deaths were
described in 2018. In the USA, based on the National Can-
cer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) program statistics for 2017 [4], there were 11.7 new
ovarian cancer cases per 100,000 women per year, and there
were 7.4 ovarian cancer-related deaths per 100,000 women
per year. The European Cancer Information System esti-
mated 45,694 new cases with 32,250 deaths from ovarian
cancer in 40 European countries for the year 2018 [5].
Moreover, the survival of the patients is highly impacted
by the staging. A recent study based on SEER’s database
showed a dramatic difference in the 5-year survival of
patients with localized disease in comparison to patients
with distant dissemination (88.5% versus 37.4%, respec-
tively) for those diagnosed in 2010–2014, being even more
impressive in women diagnosed in the 1990s [6].
Pathology
An epithelial origin is present in over 90% of malignant
ovarian tumours. This pathologic type includes different
histologic non-homogeneous types. Traditionally, patholo-
gists have classified ovarian carcinoma into the following
subtypes:
•	 Serous: it represents the most frequent type of advanced
ovarian cancers (70–80%).
3287
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging  (2021) 48:3286–3302
123456789)
1 3



---
[PAGE 3/17]

•	 Endometrioid: account for around 10–20% of ovarian
cancers.
•	 Clear-cell: account for around 5–10% of ovarian cancers.
•	 Mucinous.
•	 Transitional cell.
•	 Mixed epithelial tumours.
•	 Undifferentiated tumours.
Borderline tumours represent a grey area, neither benign
nor malignant, and account for 10–15% of ovarian tumours.
Regarding the frequency of the mentioned subtypes, there
are huge differences when comparing early-stage tumours
(clear predominance of non-serous subtypes) and advanced
stage tumours (predominance of serous subtype) [7].
When analysing together the histopathology and molecu-
lar genetics, ovarian tumours are currently classified in 5
categories: high-grade serous (70%), endometrioid (20%),
clear-cell (10%), mucinous (3%) and low-grade serous car-
cinomas (< 5%). The 5 categories represent clearly different
tumours, with different genetic risk factors, epidemiological
differences, differences in premalignant or precursor lesions,
different spreading patterns, response to chemotherapy and
prognosis. Moreover, a relevant proportion of tumours that
were classified as primary ovarian carcinomas (especially
serous, endometrioid and clear-cell carcinomas) were in fact
primary tumours of the fallopian tube and the endometrium,
affecting in a second stage the ovary [8].
The last revision of the ovarian cancer World Health Organi-
zation (WHO) classification dates back 2014. Both the WHO
classification (categorizing histopathologic and molecular
tumour types) and the International Federation of Gynaecol-
ogy and Obstetrics (FIGO) classification (classifying different
tumour stages) are the basis of the therapeutic management
decisions and the most precise when evaluating prognosis.
Regarding molecular genetics, BRCA1 and BRCA2
(abbreviation for BReast CAncer gene) are tumour sup-
pressor genes that impact the chances of developing can-
cer, helping repair DNA disruptions that can lead to cancer
and the uncontrolled growth of tumours. TP53 mutations
are identified in most (96%) high-grade serous carcinomas.
Early p53 loss followed by BRCA loss generates deficiency
in homologous recombination repair, which in turn sets off
chromosomal instability and extensive somatic copy number
changes. This is an example of recent advances in molecular
pathology, which have greatly improved the understanding
of the biology of ovarian carcinomas and evolved patient
management [9].
Patterns of spread
Metastatic spread in ovarian cancer typically follows
three different routes: (a) by contiguity to the peritoneum,
(b) lymphatic dissemination and (c) haematogenous
dissemination.
•	 Dissemination by contiguity in ovarian cancer makes the
peritoneum the most affected tissue because in normal
conditions the circulation of peritoneal fluid carries ovar-
ian cells. In the first step, the primary ovarian tumour lib-
erates malignant cells into the peritoneum, where these
cells are incorporated into the peritoneal fluid normal
flow inside the peritoneal cavity that takes them towards
the upper abdominal quadrants. The normal physiology
of the peritoneal fluid flow is based on the changes in
the subphrenic pressures generated due to the respiratory
movements, oscillating between the negative and positive
values. These pressure oscillations drive the peritoneal
fluid from the paracolic channels cranially to the right
subhepatic area and the right subdiaphragmatic area
[10]. Ovarian cancer typically disseminates by contigu-
ity to the greater omentum, paracolic channels, Douglas’
pouch, perihepatic region (particularly affecting the glis-
sonian capsule), diaphragmatic and bowel surface and,
less frequently, mesentery, splenic surface, porta hepatis
and gastrosplenic ligament. Macroscopically, peritoneal
involvement usually presents as nodules, fusiform lesions
or plaques consisting of soft tissue and affecting the peri-
toneal (parietal or visceral) walls. In the case of serous
tumours, they appear as very small calcified lesions.
•	 Lymphatic dissemination may circulate through three
alternative pathways: (a) following the ovarian lym-
phatic vessels, which is the most frequent pathway, until
it arrives at the upper common iliac and paraaortic lymph
nodes; (b) following the broad ligament and parame-
trium, until it arrives at the external iliac and obturator
lymph nodes; and (c) very scarcely, following the round
ligaments, in the direction of the external iliac and ingui-
nal lymph nodes [11–14].
•	 Haematogenous dissemination is not as frequent, target-
ing the liver, lung, spleen, central nervous system and, in
few cases, bone [13].
Over 66% of cases are detected when the disease is
already advanced due to malignant cells having already
reached extrapelvic structures, such as FIGO stages III and
IV. The late diagnosis is caused, on one hand, by the typi-
cally vague presenting symptoms and, on the other hand, the
lack of an effective screening program.
Staging systems of ovarian cancer: FIGO
and AJCC‑TNM
At present, the most frequent worldwide staging system
adopted for this primary tumour is the FIGO classification
3288
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging  (2021) 48:3286–3302
1 3



---
[PAGE 4/17]

[15, 16]. Initially established in 1973, the last revision dates
back to 2014. It defines the features, extent and prognosis of
the tumour, in order to achieve the best possible outcome fol-
lowing an optimized and personalized therapeutic approach.
The comparison between the American Joint Committee on
Cancer (AJCC) tumour–node–metastasis (TNM) and FIGO
staging systems is presented in Table 1 [8, 15–17].
It is frequently discussed in the literature the heterogene-
ity of ovarian cancer, overarching different diseases that have
dissimilar aetiology, pathogenesis, pathology and prognosis
and that can initially appear affecting the ovaries, the fal-
lopian tubes or the peritoneum. FIGO’s 2014 classification
includes as a single diagnostic category the tumours affect-
ing ovaries, fallopian tube and primary peritoneal tumours.
Laboratory
After a complete anamnesis and physical exploration, serum
CA-125 is commonly studied in the initial evaluation [7].
In early disease (FIGO stage I), its utility is controversial
because it is increased only in around half of the patients. In
advanced disease (FIGO stage II or greater), CA-125 pre-
sents increased values in around 85% of cases. However,
an important issue is the lack of specificity as CA-125 is
increased in non-ovarian malignancies (e.g. breast, lung,
colon and pancreatic tumours), pregnancy and benign dis-
eases (e.g. cirrhosis, endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory dis-
ease and ovarian cysts). Serum carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA) and CA 19–9 values occasionally may help in clari-
fying the origin of the ovarian tumour, whether if the origin
is gastrointestinal or a primary mucinous ovarian cancer.
In this regard, endoscopic procedures, such as colonoscopy
and/or gastroscopy, may be useful, especially if CA-125/
CEA ratio is ≤ 25 [18], although this is controversial. On the
other hand, CA-125 is considered a good marker of tumour
recurrence. The correlation between CA-125 levels and the
clinical evolution during chemotherapy is very strong. In
clinically tumour-free patients, CA-125 values have a prog-
nostic value and can be useful for predicting relapse [19].
Radiological imaging in ovarian cancer
Randomized clinical trials did not show benefits from
screening procedures in ovarian cancer. The only settings
where they may be appropriate are high-risk patients both
pre- and postmenopausal and especially BRCA-mutated
patients. Transvaginal and transabdominal ultrasound are
the imaging procedures of choice [19].
Studying ovarian or adnexal masses with the medical
imaging methods (ultrasound, US; computed tomography,
CT; and magnetic resonance imaging, MRI) is frequent
in post- and premenopausal women [20]. Ovarian masses
can be either benign or malignant, although they are more
frequently benign lesions, such as endometriomas (deep
ovarian endometriosis), or corpus luteum cysts (both mainly
premenopausal), thecomas, dermoid cysts and serous cys-
tadenomas. Therefore, the impact on the subsequent man-
agement decisions of these imaging findings defining the
malignancy or not of these masses is very high.
Transvaginal US (TVUS) combined with power Doppler
is the initial imaging test (sometimes in combination with
transabdominal US, TAUS). There is consensus that it is
the imaging procedure of choice in patients with adnexal
masses for studying the original location and its benign or
malignant features. Characteristics of the masses that are
considered as suspicious of malignancy are thick irregular
walls or with papillary projections and solid echogenic foci,
moreover if appearing associated with ascites or peritoneal
nodules [21–24]. In this regard, power Doppler tests may
add information to detect tumour neovascularity within solid
masses [24].
The International Ovarian Tumour Analysis group
(IOTA) has addressed the absence of uniform and standard
guidelines in gynaecological ultrasonography as the limiting
factor in the early diagnosis. The IOTA rules have introduced
a standardized examination technique to define morphologi-
cal features of ovarian masses. The IOTA simple ultrasound
rules categorize ovarian tumours as benign or malignant and
establish their application for the early detection of ovarian
cancer. The IOTA published both simple rules and complex
mathematical models based on logistic regression, allowing
reproducible studies, simple to train and apply clinically for
estimating the risk of malignancy [25].
However, up to one-fifth (5–20%) of these lesions are
classified as indeterminate with ultrasonography. Here, MRI
can provide an added value with complementary information
[26]. Also, contrast-enhanced CT (ceCT) can be helpful as
it can evidence solid enhancing components within adnexal
masses and detect peritoneal tumour spread [19].
Regarding MRI, taking into account its main features
when analysing T1- and T2-weighted images, indeterminate
adnexal masses may be classified in three groups: (a) T1
highly intense masses, (b) solid masses with high or inter-
mediate T2 signal and (c) complex cystic or cystic-solid
masses. The first group, based on the loss or absence of
signal in fat-suppressed T1-weighted imaging, can lead to
mature teratoma and haemorrhagic masses, respectively. In
the second group, based on the relationship or not with the
uterus, a distinction can be done between uterine leiomyoma
and ovarian fibroma, while the gadolinium enhancement can
be useful for characterizing solid masses with inhomoge-
neous low or intermediate T2 signal. Lastly, in the third
group and, anyway, in cases of solid components inside the
mass, gadolinium enhancement T1-weighted sequences are
required in order to establish or refute tumour enhancement
3289
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging  (2021) 48:3286–3302
123456789)
1 3



---
[PAGE 5/17]

[13, 26, 27]. Other MRI sequences may also be useful for
the characterization of these masses [26, 27].
CT from the thoracic apex to the pelvis is considered the
preferred imaging procedure for presurgical evaluation and
staging. There are publications focusing on which are the
crucial imaging findings and diagnostic criteria as well as
for generating a structured report for preoperative staging
[13, 28].
Table 1   Comparison between AJCC and FIGO staging systems
AJCC stage FIGO stage Stage grouping
Stage description
I
I
T1
The cancer is in the ovaries or fallopian tubes without any other spread
N0
M0
IA
IA
T1a
Lesion localized inside to one ovary or to one fallopian tube without cancer cells in the fluid or
washings from the abdomen and pelvis
N0
M0
IB
IB
T1b
Lesions localized inside both ovaries or fallopian tubes without cancer cells in the fluid or washings
from the abdomen and pelvis
N0
M0
IC
IC
Lesion in one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes with:
T1c
T1c1 Broken capsule during surgery
T1c2 Lesion in the surface of at least one organ or broken capsule before surgery
T1c3 Cancer cells in the fluid or washings from the abdomen and pelvis
N0
M0
II
II
T2
Lesion in one or both ovaries/fallopian tubes with spread to other pelvic organs or primary perito-
neal cancer
N0
M0
IIA
IIA
T2a
Tumoural extension to the uterus or the fallopian tubes
N0
M0
IIB
IIB
T2b
Tumoural extension to the bladder, sigmoid colon or rectum
N0
M0
IIIA1
IIIA1
T1 or T2
Tumoural extension as described
N1
Spread to the retroperitoneal (pelvic and/or paraaortic) lymph nodes
M0
IIIA2
IIIA2
T3a
Tumoural extension as described with microscopic extrapelvic peritoneal deposits
N0 or N1
Spread or not to retroperitoneal lymph nodes
M0
IIIB
IIIB
T3b
Tumoural extension as described with macroscopic (< 2 cm) extrapelvic peritoneal deposits
N0 or N1
Spread or not to retroperitoneal lymph nodes
M0
IIIC
IIIC
T3c
Tumoural extension as described with macroscopic (> 2 cm) extrapelvic peritoneal deposits
N0 or N1
Spread or not to retroperitoneal lymph nodes
M0
IVA
IVA
Any T
Pleural effusion with confirmed metastatic cells
Any N
M1a
IVB
IVB
Any T
Spread in extraperitoneal organs or inside the spleen or liver, as well as to lymph nodes different
from retroperitoneal lymph nodes
Any N
M1b
3290
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging  (2021) 48:3286–3302
1 3



---
[PAGE 6/17]

Treatment
Cytoreductive (also called debulking) surgical procedures
and chemotherapy (platinum-based) are the cornerstones of
ovarian cancer therapeutical management.
Cytoreductive surgery
Primary cytoreductive surgery is aimed to remove com-
pletely the tumour before subsequent chemotherapy is
administered, while interval cytoreductive surgery is done
following neoadjuvant chemotherapy, usually three cycles.
Complete cytoreduction, or R0, is defined as the result
of a surgical procedure that has cleared all macroscopic
tumour, leaving no macroscopic residual disease. There is
evidence that complete cytoreduction is the best independent
prognostic factor in advanced ovarian cancer. Thus, a pre-
cise presurgical staging is key for defining the management
plan. If complete cytoreduction is feasible with an accept-
able surgical morbidity, primary debulking surgery should
be offered [29–31].
According to the European Society for Medical Oncol-
ogy (ESMO)-European Society of Gynaecological Oncol-
ogy (ESGO) recommendations [29, 30], a multidisciplinary
team working in a centre specialized in ovarian cancer must
be in charge of patient selection for either primary debulking
surgery or neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Radiological imaging
or diagnostic laparoscopy must be part of the standard diag-
nostic and staging algorithm. Exclusion criteria from pri-
mary surgery, based on ESGO guidelines on ovarian cancer
surgery [31], when the tumour has spread with the following
findings, among other factors, in the diagnostic work-up are
extensive and profound invasion of the root of small intes-
tine mesentery; diffuse carcinomatosis of the small intestine
with such an extensive dissemination that surgical clearance
would produce a short bowel syndrome (the intestine left
measuring less than 1.5 m); gastric/duodenal, head or mid-
dle part of the pancreas diffuse disease/profound invasion;
tumour affecting coeliac trunk, hepatic arteries, left gastric
artery; central or multisegmental hepatic secondary lesions;
multiple lung secondary lesions (preferably pathologically
confirmed); non-resectable lymphadenopathies; and central
nervous system secondary lesions.
Nodal staging
With regard to nodal staging, there has been a paradigm
change in the last few years. In early-stage ovarian carcinoma
(EOC), ESMO-ESGO guidelines indicate that the required
management includes nodal staging surgery. In presurgical
stage I patients, this surgical procedure must encompass a
bilateral pelvic and paraaortic lymphadenectomy up to the
left renal vein (independently of the surgical approach). In
any case, given the low prevalence of lymphatic infiltration
in certain pathology subtypes (e.g. mucinous carcinoma of
expansile subtype or low-grade serous carcinoma, LGSC),
there are doubts and discussion regarding the indication for
staging surgery in these patients (ESMO-ESGO recommen-
dation, level of evidence, IV; strength of the recommenda-
tion, A) [29, 30]. When referring to lymph node dissection
with the aim of restaging, the procedure can be eluded when
nodal status will not change clinical or therapeutic deci-
sions (ESMO-ESGO recommendation, level of evidence, V;
strength of the recommendation, B) [29, 30]. In the case of
serous borderline ovarian tumours (sBOTs) with peritoneal
implants, there is evidence that residual disease has a prog-
nostic value. In this situation, both from a staging point of
view and a therapeutical objective, it is of utmost importance
to aim at an entire removal of peritoneal implants. In the
case of stage II/III sBOTs, there is no evidence of improved
evolution following lymphadenectomy (level of evidence,
IV; strength of the recommendation, B) [29, 30]. Finally,
regarding the cases with advanced ovarian cancer (AOC), the
recently published lymphadenectomy in ovarian neoplasms
(LION) trial [32] provided evidence on the limitations of
lymphadenectomy. Available first-level evidence, coming
from randomized clinical trials, is limited regarding the util-
ity of systematic pelvic and paraaortic lymphadenectomy that
has, however, been broadly applied in the surgical treatment
of patients with advanced ovarian cancer. The LION trial
demonstrated that, in advanced ovarian cancer cases with
intraabdominal macroscopically complete resection and nor-
mal lymph nodes both before and during surgery, system-
atic pelvic and paraaortic lymphadenectomy in cases with
advanced ovarian cancer was not associated with improved
survival (overall or progression-free) compared to no lym-
phadenectomy but was associated with more postsurgical
complications [32].
Systemic treatment
The first-line ovarian cancer treatment and standard-of-
care chemotherapy is the carboplatin/paclitaxel combina-
tion. Bevacizumab and poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) inhibitors are now incorporated in the
management guidelines. In addition to standard chemo-
therapy, some patients may be treated with molecularly
targeted therapies. The addition of bevacizumab, an antian-
giogenic drug, should be considered in patients with stage
III–IV ovarian cancer. The use of maintenance therapy with
olaparib, an oral PARP inhibitor, demonstrated significant
advantages regarding progression-free survival especially
in patients with initially diagnosed advanced ovarian cancer
with BRCA1/2 mutation, as shown in the SOLO1 trial [29,
30, 33].
3291
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging  (2021) 48:3286–3302
123456789)
1 3



---
[PAGE 7/17]

Around 70% of cases will recur in the first 3 years. In
these patients, the progression-free interval after finishing
the preceding line of chemotherapy is strongly associated
with the prognosis and probability of response to second-
line chemotherapy and subsequent chemotherapy lines.
Traditionally, patients that present disease progression
in the first 6 months after finishing platinum-based chemo-
therapy are considered to be platinum-resistant and are
unlikely to benefit from a re-challenge by platinum-based
chemotherapy, while patients presenting progressive dis-
ease in the time interval of more than 6 or even 12 months
are considered platinum-sensitive and likely to respond to
platinum therapy. This concept, developed when alternatives
to platinum re-treatment were scarce, presents limitations
and was discontinued at the fifth Ovarian Cancer Consensus
Conference of the Gynecologic Cancer InterGroup (GCIG)
[34]. Bevacizumab could be recommended both combined
with platinum-based therapy and, after, as maintenance ther-
apy in those cases presenting a platinum-free interval (PFI)
over 6 months and in combination with second- or third-
line non-platinum chemotherapy (weekly paclitaxel, PLD,
topotecan) in patients with shorter PFI. PARP inhibitors
(olaparib, niraparib and rucaparib) could be recommended
as maintenance therapy after a response to platinum-based
second or higher line of treatment. Their benefit is highest in
patients presenting BRCA mutation, although those without
BRCA mutation also benefit of the therapy. Furthermore, in
selected cases presenting a first relapse, complete cytore-
ductive surgery followed by chemotherapy achieves better
progression-free survival (PFS) and makes the beneficial
effect extensive to the next chemotherapy line [29, 30].
In the era of precision medicine, research focuses on
looking for targeted therapies for the different histological
subtypes with their specific molecular features and different
chemosensitivity and also variable CA-125 expression and
positron emission tomography (PET) imaging semiology
with dedicated radiopharmaceuticals. The targeted treat-
ments being investigated are immune checkpoint inhibitors,
PARP inhibitors, hormone receptor modulators and antian-
giogenic agents [29, 30].
Follow‑up
Clinical evaluation and CA-125 are the standard in the fol-
low-up of ovarian cancer after primary treatment [28]. The
indications and application of imaging procedures (ultra-
sound, chest–abdomen–pelvis CT, whole-body MRI or PET/
CT) have to be based on sound clinical indications, deriving
either from symptoms, signs or increasing CA-125 values
[29, 30]. In patients in which there is suspicion of relapse,
CT is the preferred technique, although PET/CT can be a
valid alternative if performed with contrast enhancement, as
the contrast-enhanced CT component is mandatory in this
setting to accurately evaluate peritoneal carcinomatosis.
PET/CT procedure
2‑[18F]FDG PET/CT acquisition
The 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT procedure has been described in
the EANM guideline [35]. In ovarian cancer it is important
to effectively search for cancer deposits in the regions where
this tumour spreads more frequently, namely, the perito-
neum, the lymphatic system and the bloodstream.
If ceCT can be done as part of the 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT,
it may be evaluated by the multidisciplinary tumour board
to avoid performing an additional separate diagnostic CT.
It is generally considered helpful to obtain multiphase
contrast-enhanced CT imaging in patients with known/sus-
pected ovarian cancer, especially for the evaluation of the
liver, lymph nodes, mesentery, omentum, pleura and lungs.
All available patient CT dose reduction methods should be
considered, including automatic exposure control and itera-
tive reconstruction.
Data extraction and analysis
Qualitative PET/CT categorizes the findings into malignant,
indeterminate or benignant. 2-[18F]FDG uptake is visually
compared with the background and with other structures,
such as the mediastinum and the liver. Based on the degree
of 2-[18F]FDG uptake and the particular context of the study
(clinical indication, previous treatments and concomitant
processes), the findings are categorized into the aforemen-
tioned qualitative values.
Quantitative PET/CT may be applied as a diagnostic or
prognostic tool (i.e. single measurement) or for therapy
response assessment (i.e. longitudinal studies). Metrics
include standardized uptake values (SUV, general acro-
nym) computed either using the body weight (SUV) or the
lean body mass (SUL), metabolic active tumour volume
(MATV or MTV) and total lesion glycolysis (TLG), defined
as MATV × SUVmean. In fact, MATV is the volume inside a
user- or algorithm-defined volume of interest (VOI) used to
circumscribe the metabolically active tumour. Several tech-
niques have been proposed to determine the limits of the
VOI, threshold-based or algorithm-based [36], while TLG
calculated by multiplying MATV by the mean SUV of all
voxels in the MATV incorporates both 2-[18F]FDG uptake
and size of the tumour, also known as whole metabolic bur-
den of the tumour [37].
The use of quantitative 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT parameters
as imaging biomarkers in centres that have several PET/
CT systems or in trials involving different PET/CT systems
3292
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging  (2021) 48:3286–3302
1 3



---
[PAGE 8/17]

requires a minimum standardization to make these parame-
ters comparable between patients, independently of the PET/
CT scanner acquiring the images.
Delineation of MATVs may be affected by similar errors
as occur when calculating SUVs, leading to one of the main
causes of variability, which is variations in the delineation
methodology of lesions [38]. MATVs also allow extraction
of heterogeneity features. However, radiomic features are
greatly affected and sensitive to a few confounding factors,
being image reconstruction settings an example, and this
translates into challenges when aiming at its clinical imple-
mentation [39, 40].
It is therefore recommended to comply with harmoniz-
ing standards such as the EANM/EARL program, one of
the international harmonization programs aiming at using
2-[18F]FDG PET/CT as a quantitative imaging biomarker
[41]. Radiomics should also follow the definitions of the
image biomarker standardization initiative (IBSI).
In addition to harmonization issues, attention should be
paid to avoid including ureters or bladder when computing
MATV in patients with bulky disease (Fig. 1).
Therapy assessment should be performed according to
either the European Organisation for Research and Treat-
ment of Cancer (EORTC) PET response criteria or PER-
CIST [42–44]. In addition to the use of the area harbouring
the highest uptake, it is recommended to explore peritoneal
index-adapted PERCIST classification where the 5 target
lesions would be based on one of the scores that have been
developed for assessing the extension of peritoneal carci-
nomatosis. Several scores for laparotomic assessment of
tumour/carcinomatosis extension have been described: the
Sugarbaker score or the peritoneal cancer index (PCI) and
the Aletti, Fagotti and Eisenkop scores, which attribute a
score to several anatomical regions of the abdomen [45, 46].
2‑[18F]FDG PET/CT indications
•	 Initial diagnosis and staging
•	 Prognostic value
•	 Treatment planning
–	 Evaluation of tumour resectability
–	 Predictive value before upfront debulking surgery or
interval debulking surgery
–	 Predictive value before chemotherapy
•	 Therapy assessment
–	 Chemotherapy
•	 Relapse detection
–	 Non-conclusive radiological imaging
–	 Negative radiological imaging with increased tumour
markers
•	 Follow-up
Fig. 1   Example of metabolic
active tumour volume (MATV)
delineation in a patient with
stage IIIc FIGO ovarian cancer
enrolled in the CHIVA trial
[95] in the chemotherapy plus
placebo arm. Attention should
be paid to avoid including the
ureters or bladder in the tumour
burden when drawing MATV.
Early therapy assessment
2-[18F]FDG PET/CT (b) was
performed 20 days after base-
line scan (a), after the first cycle
of treatment. This patient was
classified as stable metabolic
disease as per PERCIST therapy
response criteria. Maximum
intensity projections (MIP) of
2-[18F]FDG PET are presented
3293
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging  (2021) 48:3286–3302
123456789)
1 3



---
[PAGE 9/17]

Each indication has been reviewed, assigning a level of
evidence and a recommendation grade (Table 2) following
the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence
(NICE) adaptation, as previously used [47, 48], as follows:
Levels of evidence
The level of evidence is a rating of the literature data on
which the recommendations formulated are based. The level
depends on the type and quality of studies available and
degree of consistency across their results. Details of the lev-
els of evidence used are presented below:
•	 Level I: There are good-quality meta-analyses or good-
quality randomized trials with cross-consistent results.
New data will most likely not change confidence in the
estimated effect.
•	 Level II: There is good-quality evidence (randomized tri-
als (B1) or prospective or retrospective studies (B2) with
overall cross-consistent results. New data may impact
confidence in the estimate of effect or may change the
estimate.
•	 Level III: The studies available carry methodological
weaknesses, and/or the results of the studies are not
always cross-consistent. New data will most likely impact
confidence in the estimate of effect and will likely change
the estimate.
•	 Level IV: There are no data or only case series. There is
a great deal of uncertainty as to the estimated effect.
Grades of recommendation
•	 A: At least one meta-analysis, systematic review or rand-
omized controlled trials (RCT) directly applicable to the
target population and demonstrating overall consistency
of results
•	 B: A body of evidence including high-quality systematic
reviews of case–control or cohort studies, directly appli-
cable to the target population, and demonstrating overall
consistency of results
•	 C: A body of evidence including well-conducted case–
control or cohort studies with a low risk of confounding
or bias, directly applicable to the target population and
demonstrating overall consistency of results
•	 D: Non-analytic studies, e.g. case reports, case series and
expert opinion
Initial diagnosis and staging in patients presenting
with a pelvic mass
Level of evidence: III
Recommendation: grade C
Many publications have focused on the diagnostic effi-
cacy of 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT for ovarian cancer in patients
presenting with a pelvic mass, aiming at ameliorating man-
agement decisions identifying patients in whom surgical
intervention is indicated (positive PET). With the aim of
detecting ovarian tumours in fifty consecutive patients pre-
senting a pelvic mass and had a surgical intervention sched-
uled, Castellucci et al. [49] reported comparable sensitivity
for 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT and TVUS (around 87–90%), but
2-[18F]FDG PET/CT presented better specificity. In another
prospective study of 97 patients presenting pelvic masses,
Risum et al. reported high specificity of 2-[18F]FDG PET/
CT for detecting malignant disease related to ovarian cancer
as well as high sensitivity (92.5% and 100%, respectively)
[50]. Nam et al. [51] in 133 women obtained 2-[18F]FDG
PET/CT accuracy (92%), better than pelvic power Doppler
US (83%) and CT/MR (74%) in differentiating benign vs
borderline/malignant adnexal masses.
The pathophysiologic bases of the aforementioned
observations include glucose transporter 1 (GLUT-1) over-
expression and microvessel density/tumour proliferation,
both being indicators of tumour aggressiveness and worse
prognosis. Therefore, researchers indicate that 2-[18F]FDG
PET/CT helps ameliorate patient selection for surgery and
as guidance for cytoreductive surgery [52, 53]. Moreover,
staging with 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT coincided with surgical
staging in 78% of cases, indicating 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT may
be applied in the presurgical staging of patients in which
ovarian cancer is suspected [51]. Thus, even if Yamamoto
et al. and Kitajima et al. [54, 55] confirmed high 2-[18F]
FDG PET/CT sensitivity and specificity in differentiating
malignant from benign ovarian masses, their reports present
low diagnostic efficacy when discriminating between bor-
derline–malignant and benign lesions. Furthermore, even
after positive findings when analysing the diagnostic value
of 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT in ovarian cancer, Fenchel et al.
[56] and Tanizaki et al. [57] described false-negative and
false-positive results. The false-negative patients appeared
because of the absent or low 2-[18F]FDG accumulation
Table 2   Clinical indications, levels of evidence and grade of recom-
mendation for 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT in ovarian cancer
Clinical indication of 2-[18F]FDG
PET/CT in ovarian cancer
Level of evidence
Grade of
recommen-
dation
Initial diagnosis and staging
in patients presenting with a
pelvic mass
III
Grade C
Prognostic value
I
Grade B
Treatment planning
IV
Grade C
Therapy assessment
II
Grade B
Relapse detection
I
Grade A
3294
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging  (2021) 48:3286–3302
1 3



---
[PAGE 10/17]

in early tumours and clear-cell, mucinous and cystic car-
cinomas (compared with serous carcinoma and epithelial
carcinoma) [58–60]. The false-positive results commonly
appeared associated to 2-[18F]FDG accumulation in benign
conditions, such as cystadenomas, endometriomas and acute
inflammatory processes, or in premenopausal ovaries deriv-
ing from cyclic functional activity changes.
As in other fields of oncology, it is a well-known fact
that there is an overlap between the degree of 2-[18F]FDG
uptake in malignant, borderline–malignant and benign
lesions. Thus, 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT has a good diagnos-
tic accuracy in discriminating ovarian cancer from benign
tumours, this not being the case when trying to differentiate
borderline–malignant from benign tumours because of its
comparatively lower diagnostic accuracy in this context [57].
A meta-analysis including 8 studies and 594 patients
reported an joint sensitivity and specificity for metastasis of
0.72 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.61–0.81) and 0.93
(95% CI = 0.85–0.97), respectively [61]. Heterogeneity
analysis showed high values both for sensitivity (97.57%)
and specificity (96.74%). In sensitivity analyses, studies
using laparotomy as the gold standard evidenced better
sensitivity and specificity (0.77, 95% CI = 0.67–0.87, and
0.96, 95% CI = 0.92–0.99, respectively) than those includ-
ing diagnostic laparoscopy (0.62, 95% CI = 0.46–0.77, and
0.84, 95% CI = 0.69–0.99, respectively). Better specificity
was demonstrated in studies that confirmed surgical find-
ings using pathology (0.95, 95% CI = 0.90–0.99) than in
a study not applying pathology confirmation (0.69, 95%
CI = 0.24–1.00). Studies with a lower prevalence of the
2-[18F]FDG-avid subtype showed better specificity (0.97,
95% CI = 0.94–1.00) than those with a higher prevalence
(0.89, 95% CI = 0.80–0.97).
Prognostic value
Level of evidence: I
Recommendation: grade B
The assessment of the prognosis is key for patient man-
agement planning. There is broad evidence confirming the
prognostic value of 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT in ovarian cancer,
with many meta-analyses published in the last years [58,
62–73]. MTV and TLG from 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT were sig-
nificant prognostic factors in these patients. Although there
was clinical heterogeneity and methodological differences
between studies, patients with a high MTV or TLG present
more risk of disease progression or death [61].
2-[18F]FDG PET/CT is a diagnostic procedure useful for
the accurate detection of not previously known metastases.
Moreover, it gives an insight into tumour biology and behav-
iour and, thus, the potential influence of these aspects on
the prognosis. Several studies have evidenced significant
associations between primary tumour SUVmax and FIGO
stage, pathology (serous/non-serous carcinoma), metastatic
lymphadenopathies and a bad prognosis with a significantly
worse overall survival rate between cases with high and low
primary tumour SUVmax [63, 74, 75]. Mucinous and clear-
cell ovarian cancer shows a significantly lower SUVmax
than in serous carcinomas [63]. The explanation for this can
be found in the pathophysiology, based on different glucose
transporter concentrations in the different tumour subtypes.
Cho et al. [52] described a strong association between mem-
brane GLUT-1 overexpression in the primary tumour and
bad overall survival and also ovarian cancer aggressiveness.
Other prognostic factors prior to treatment are volumetric
metabolic PET parameters, such as MTV and TLG [64].
Chung et al. [76] observed that MTV and TLG were
statistically significant independent prognostic factors in
ovarian cancer associated with progression-free interval.
Lee et al. [64] showed that TLG was an independent prog-
nostic factor for disease progression following cytoreduc-
tive surgery. Gallicchio et al. reported similar data for MTV
[77]. Risum et al. [70] showed that stage IIIC/IV disease
on 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT was associated with worse overall
survival and proposed using 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT criteria
for referring ovarian cancer patients to neoadjuvant chemo-
therapy before surgery. Therefore, 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT
helps finding previously unknown metastatic lesions but also
helps evaluating the risk of residual cancer following surgi-
cal treatment, in summary, improving patient management.
Treatment planning
–	 Evaluation of tumour resectability
–	 Predictive value before upfront debulking surgery or
interval debulking surgery
–	 Predictive value before chemotherapy
Level of evidence: IV
Recommendation: grade C
In these clinical situations, the available evidence is lim-
ited [78–85], including retrospective studies. In women with
advanced stage ovarian cancer, no firm conclusions can be
drawn regarding the replacement of diagnostic CT by 2-[18F]
FDG PET/CT or contrast-enhanced or diffusion-weighted
(DW) MRI to assess incomplete debulking surgery. 2-[18F]
FDG PET/CT and MRI are commonly available in hospitals,
and they suggested there was a high specificity and moderate
sensitivity to assess incomplete debulking. Potential advan-
tages included the ability of 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT to detect
extra-abdominal (distant) disease and the soft tissue contrast
of MRI for (small) lesion detection. Importantly, the level of
evidence is insufficient to advise routine addition of 2-[18F]
FDG PET/CT or MRI to clinical practice [84].
As mentioned above in the “Treatment” section, there
has been a paradigm change with regard to nodal staging.
3295
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging  (2021) 48:3286–3302
123456789)
1 3



---
[PAGE 11/17]

First, in early-stage ovarian carcinoma, the indication for
staging surgery may be questioned, whereas when referring
to lymph node dissection for restaging purposes, the proce-
dure may be avoided if the nodal status does not alter patient
management [29, 30]. Second, in the case of serous bor-
derline ovarian tumours (sBOTs) with peritoneal implants,
there is no proven benefit of lymphadenectomy in stage II/
III sBOTs [29, 30]. Third, in patients with advanced ovarian
cancer (AOC), after intraabdominal macroscopically com-
plete resection and presenting normal lymph nodes both
before and during surgery, systematic pelvic and paraaortic
lymphadenectomy did not correlate with better overall or
progression-free survival than no lymphadenectomy but was
associated with an increased incidence rate of postsurgical
morbidity and complications [32], as well as increased costs.
Because of this, to ameliorate patient selection for those who
will benefit from lymphadenectomy, a presurgical imaging
test providing an accurate nodal staging was proposed [86].
Many studies have shown 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT has a bet-
ter diagnostic performance in detecting metastatic lymph
nodes compared with ceCT only [87]. A meta-analysis by
Yuan et al. [88] (including 882 patients from 18 studies)
showed that 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT had better accuracy than
both ceCT and MR in detecting metastatic lymphadenopa-
thies, with sensitivity and specificity values of 73% and 96%
for 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT, 42% and 95% for ceCT and 54%
and 88% for MRI, respectively, with significant differences
reached only in sensitivity. Signorelli et al. [86] confirmed
the previous results. These studies evidence that 2-[18F]FDG
PET/CT may be a precise imaging test for selecting patients
could benefit from systematic lymphadenectomy. Thus, the
high negative predictive value (NPV) may avoid lymphad-
enectomy in many cases, reducing to a minimum the surgical
complications.
It is known that 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT can ameliorate pre-
surgical staging by detecting extra-abdominal spread not
detected by radiological procedures [51, 89, 90] including
lymphadenopathies situated outside the abdominopelvic area
as well as unsuspected extraovarian tumours [49, 51]. Loca-
tions of metastatic lesions found by 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT
were predominantly supradiaphragmatic [90]. Moreover, the
presurgical staging of advanced disease with PET has evi-
denced that up-staging from stage III to IV happens in a high
proportion of cases [91]. In addition, 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT
improves the identification of stage III/IV patients for whom
complete debulking is not possible. There is evidence that
stage IV cases with diverse volumes of residual disease may
have similar evolutions; thus, an early detection of stage IV
can be useful for changing the therapeutic approach.
With regard to 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT and its indication
or not for assessing peritoneal carcinomatosis when stag-
ing ovarian cancer, there is certain controversy, but several
studies have reported promising results. ceCT is the most
accurate. 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT seems to have an acceptable
diagnostic accuracy for tumour implants greater than 5 mm,
although in any case a detailed review of the CT images of
the 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT should be done, comparing with
previous CT images, for an adequately evaluation of the sta-
tus of the disease in the peritoneum. In cases with peritoneal
carcinomatosis with evident 2-[18F]FDG uptake, an apron
sign or shield sign can be detected, appearing as 2-[18F]FDG
uptake along the anterior abdomen (on occasions related to
increased peritoneal thickening or omental fat stranding on
ceCT) [92].
Therapy assessment
Level of evidence: II
Recommendation: grade B
There are few clinical trials evaluating the role of 2-[18F]
FDG PET/CT in the assessment of therapy response. Chun-
dury and colleagues [80] explored the role of 2-[18F]FDG
PET/CT in order to evaluate the efficacy of intensity-modu-
lated radiation therapy (IMRT) in women treated for recur-
rent ovarian cancer. Among 17 patients, 11 showed a par-
tial metabolic response, while in six a complete metabolic
response was observed. Furthermore, among 11 patients
with partial metabolic response, in only two cases recurrence
was observed at the site of IMRT, while of the 6 patients
with complete metabolic response recurrence was found in
only one woman at the site of IMRT.
In three studies, 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT was used to assess
neoadjuvant chemotherapy response [85, 93, 94]. Vallius
et al. [85] reported that patients with normalization of
SUVmax after 3 courses had higher probabilities to benefit
from additional 3 courses. The study from Hynninen et al.
[93] did not confirm the ability of 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT to
distinguish responders from non-responders compared to
morphological imaging, due to residual 2-[18F]FDG activ-
ity. In fact although 2-[18F]FDG uptake at the end of the
treatment tended to be confirmed in case of relapse, this
residual activity was observed even in RECIST complete
responders. In another study, Vallius et al. [94] described
that a decrease in MATV < 85% permitted identifying cases
with stable or progressive disease (as per RECIST 1.1) after
neoadjuvant chemotherapy for inoperable EOC with a sen-
sitivity and specificity of 70% and 78%, respectively, and
that MTV decrease was associated with PFS. More recently,
an ancillary PET study from the CHIVA trial [95] demon-
strated that 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT using EORTC or PER-
CIST criteria was useful to evaluate early tumour response
and predict second-look surgery outcome, PFS and OS. In
this study, neither MATV nor TLG was useful in predict-
ing survival.
3296
European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging  (2021) 48:3286–3302
1 3



---
[PAGE 12/17]

Relapse detection
•	 Non-conclusive radiological imaging
•	 Negative radiological imaging with increased tumour
markers
Level of evidence: I
Recommendation: grade A
There is broad evidence regarding this indication
[96–100]. Several meta-analyses have reported the high
performance of 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT in suspected recurrent
disease with a better diagnostic accuracy than radiological
imaging, especially in the context of increasing CA-125
serum levels [26, 88, 101]. Furthermore, ESMO guidelines
on ovarian cancer indicate that 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT may
indicate locations of disease not detected on CT. The main
role of 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT is to contribute in selecting
patients for secondary debulking surgery, by excluding cases
with additional sites of disease not detected on CT and not
treatable with cytoreduction [7].
Increased serum CA-125 is very accurate for indicating
that there is active recurrent disease. Nevertheless, normal
serum CA-125 does not permit excluding a relapse. Thus,
there is evidence that in ovarian cancer patients in com-
plete clinical remission, a progressive low-level elevation in
serum CA-125 (staying under the upper normal threshold) is
highly predictive of relapse [102]. The role of 2-[18F]FDG
PET/CT in these cases with a low-level elevation of serum
CA-125 has been studied with promising results [103–106].
The available studies confirm the utility of 2-[18F]FDG
PET/CT to change treatment management, on one hand
guiding the indications to otherwise unplanned therapies
and, on the other hand, saving from performing previously
planned diagnostic procedures, with values ranging between
30 and 57% [107–110]. The available reports coincide with
findings from the US National Oncology PET Registry,
showing that changes in management were done in 38% to
45% of cases who were restaged with 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT
[111, 112].
Follow‑up
Follow-up is not indicated unless there is suspicion of
relapse and negative radiological imaging [29, 30].
Conclusion
2-[18F]FDG PET/CT is an established imaging technique
in oncology in general and in gynaecological cancer in
particular. Given the high incidence and aggressiveness
of ovarian cancer, a guideline focusing on the role of
2-[18F]FDG PET/CT in this tumour was developed. The
evidence available in the literature was reviewed for each
clinical indication, assigning a level of evidence and a
recommendation grade following the NICE adaptation. In
conclusion, 2-[18F]FDG PET/CT is most useful in relapse
detection (level of evidence I, grade of recommendation
A), followed by its prognostic value (level of evidence I,
grade of recommendation B). There is less evidence for
therapy assessment (level of evidence II, grade of recom-
mendation B) and very scarce or low quality evidence for
initial diagnosis and staging in patients presenting with a
pelvic mass (level of evidence III, grade of recommenda-
tion C) and treatment planning (level of evidence IV, grade
of recommendation C). Finally, multidisciplinary collabo-
ration is especially important to obtain the best possible
outcome, as well as weighting the need for personalizing
diagnosis and therapy to the individual patient.
Acknowledgements  The authors are grateful to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for scientific and logistic support. They
also appreciate the contribution of the EANM National Societies of
Nuclear Medicine and EANM committees who reviewed the guideline.
Declarations 
Ethics approval  This article does not contain any studies with human
participants performed by any of the authors.
Conflict of interest  The authors declare no competing interests.