# FDG


---
[PAGE 1/12]

[18F]FDG PET/CT: EANM procedure guidelines for tumour imaging:
version 3.0
Ronald Boellaard a,b,*, Ken Herrmann c,d, Sally F. Barrington e, Iain Cranston f,
Felix M. Mottaghy g,h, Corneline J. Hoekstra i, Thomas Beyer j, Lucy C. Pike k,
Antoon TM. Willemsen b, Michael M. Graham l, Jos´ee M. Zijlstra m, Fred Verzijlbergen n,
Bernd J. Krause o, Albert J. Arends p, Wolfgang A. Weber q, Otto S. Hoekstra a,1,
Roberto C. Delgado Bolton r,s, Giorgio Testanera e, Sigrid Stroobants t,u, Arturo Chiti v,w,
Francesco Giammarille x, Christophe Deroose y, Wim JG. Oyen z,aa,ab
a Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Location VUMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
b Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands
c Department of Nuclear Medicine, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany
d German Cancer Consortium, Partner Site Essen, A Partnership Between DKFZ and University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany
e King’s College London and Guy’s and St Thomas’ PET Centre, School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King’s College London, United Kingdom
f Department of Diabetes & Endocrinology, Portsmouth Hospitals University NHS Trust, Portsmouth, United Kingdom
g Department of Nuclear Medicine, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Germany
h Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Center (MUMC+), Maastricht, the Netherlands
i Jeroen Bosch Hospital ’s-Hertogenbosch, the Netherlands
j QIMP Team, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria
k Nuclear Medicine, Mid and South Essex NHS Foundation Trust, Essex, United Kingdom
l Department of Radiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA
m Department of Hematology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Location VUMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
n Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
o Rostock University Medical Center, Rostock, Germany
p Medical Physics Dept, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, the Netherlands
q Department of Nuclear Medicine, TUM University Hospital, Bavarian Cancer Research Center, Munich, Germany
r Department of Diagnostic Imaging (Radiology) and Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital San Pedro and Centre for Biomedical Research of La Rioja (CIBIR), Logro˜no,
La Rioja, Spain
s Servicio C´antabro de Salud, Santander, Spain
t Department of Nuclear Medicine, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium
u Molecular Imaging and Radiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium
v Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy
w IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy
x Nuclear Medicine and Diagnostic Imaging Section, Division of Human Health, Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications, International Atomic Energy Agency,
Vienna, Austria
y Nuclear Medicine, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Flanders, Belgium
z Department of Radiology & Nuclear Medicine, Rijnstate Hospital, Arnhem, the Netherlands
aa Humanitas University, Department of Biomedical Sciences and Humanitas Clinical and Research Centre, Department of Nuclear Medicine, Milan, Italy
ab Radboud University Medical Centre, Department of Radiology & Nuclear Medicine, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
* Corresponding author. Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Location VUMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
E-mail addresses: r.boellaard@amsterdamumc.nl (R. Boellaard), ken.herrmann@uk-essen.de (K. Herrmann), sally.barrington@kcl.ac.uk (S.F. Barrington), iain.
cranston@porthosp.nhs.uk
(I. Cranston), felix.mottaghy@mumc.nl
(F.M. Mottaghy), c.hoekstra@jbz.nl
(C.J. Hoekstra), thomas.beyer@meduniwien.ac.at
(T. Beyer), lucy.pike3@nhs.net (L.C. Pike), a.t.m.willemsen@umcg.nl (A.TM. Willemsen), michael-graham@uiowa.edu (M.M. Graham), j.zijlstra@amsterdamumc.
nl (J.M. Zijlstra), fred.verzijlbergen@gmail.com (F. Verzijlbergen), dekan@med.uni-rostock.de (B.J. Krause), arends.bertjan@gmail.com (A.J. Arends), w.weber@
tum.de (W.A. Weber), os.hoekstra@amsterdamumc.nl (O.S. Hoekstra), rbiolton@gmail.com (R.C. Delgado Bolton), arcivampiro@gmail.com (G. Testanera),
sigrid.stroobants@uza.be (S. Stroobants), chiti.arturo@hsr.it (A. Chiti), francesco.giammarile@gmail.com (F. Giammarille), christophe.deroose@uzleuven.be
(C. Deroose), woyen@rijnstate.nl, wim.oyen@hunimed.eu (W.JG. Oyen).
1 Deceased 23 June 2025.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The EANM Journal
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/the-eanm-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eanmj.2025.100006
Received 12 August 2025; Received in revised form 9 September 2025; Accepted 11 September 2025
1 (2025) 100006
Available online 23 September 2025
3051-2921/Crown Copyright © 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM). This is an open access article under
the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).



---
[PAGE 2/12]

A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords
[18F]FDG
PET/CT
Imaging procedure
Tumour
Oncology
Quantification
A B S T R A C T
The purpose of these guidelines is to assist physicians in recommending, performing, interpreting and reporting
the results of [18F]FDG PET/CT for oncological imaging of adult and paediatric patients. PET is a quantitative
imaging technique and therefore requires a common quality control (QC)/quality assurance (QA) procedure to
maintain the accuracy and precision of quantitation. Repeatability and reproducibility are two essential re­
quirements for any quantitative measurement and/or imaging biomarker. Repeatability relates to the uncertainty
in obtaining the same result in the same patient when they are examined more than once on the same system.
However, imaging biomarkers should also have adequate reproducibility, i.e. the ability to yield the same result
in the same patient when that patient is examined on different systems and at different imaging sites. Adequate
repeatability and reproducibility are essential for the clinical management of patients and the use of [18F]FDG
PET/CT within multicentre trials. A common standardised imaging procedure will help promote the appropriate
use of [18F]FDG PET/CT imaging and increase the value of publications and, therefore, their contribution to
evidence-based medicine. Moreover, consistency in numerical values between platforms and imaging centres
that acquire the data will potentially enhance the role of semi-quantitative and quantitative image interpretation.
Precision and accuracy are additionally important as [18F]FDG PET/CT is used to evaluate tumour response as
well as for diagnosis, prognosis and staging. Therefore, both the previous and these new guidelines specifically
aim to achieve standardised uptake value harmonisation in multicentre settings.
1. Preamble
The European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM) is a profes­
sional nonprofit medical association that facilitates communication
worldwide among individuals pursuing clinical and research excellence
in nuclear medicine. The EANM was founded in 1985.
These guidelines are intended to assist practitioners in providing
appropriate nuclear medicine care for patients. They are not inflexible
rules or requirements of practice and are not intended, nor should they
be used, to establish a legal standard of care.
The ultimate judgment regarding the propriety of any specific pro­
cedure or course of action must be made by medical professionals taking
into account the unique circumstances of each case. Thus, there is no
implication that an approach differing from the guidelines, standing
alone, is below the standard of care. To the contrary, a conscientious
practitioner may responsibly adopt a course of action different from that
set out in the guidelines when, in the reasonable judgment of the prac­
titioner, such course of action is indicated by the condition of the pa­
tient, limitations of available resources or advances in knowledge or
technology subsequent to publication of the guidelines.
The practice of medicine involves not only the science but also the art
of dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, alleviation and treatment of
disease. The variety and complexity of human conditions make it
impossible to always reach the most appropriate diagnosis or to predict
with certainty a particular response to treatment. Therefore, it should be
recognised that adherence to these guidelines will not ensure an accu­
rate diagnosis or a successful outcome. All that should be expected is
that the practitioner will follow a reasonable course of action based on
current knowledge, available resources and the needs of the patient to
deliver effective and safe medical care. The sole purpose of these
guidelines is to assist practitioners in achieving this objective.
2. Introduction
18Fluorine-fluorodeoxyglucose ([18F]FDG) PET imaging is a non-
invasive diagnostic tool that provides tomographic images represent­
ing the three-dimensional distribution of positron-emitting labelled ra­
diotracers. PET allows non-invasive quantitative assessment of
biochemical and functional processes. The most commonly used radio­
tracer, at present, is the 18F-labelled glucose analogue [18F]FDG which
can be used to obtain quantitative parameters concerning the metabolic
activity of target tissues. 18F is a cyclotron-produced radioisotope of
fluorine that emits positrons and has a short half-life (109.7 min). It
allows labelling of numerous molecular tracers that can be imaged
within a few hours (typically <3 h) after injection. [18F]FDG is an
analogue of glucose and is taken up by living cells via cell membrane
glucose transporters and subsequently incorporated into the first step of
the normal glycolytic pathway.
[18F]FDG accumulation in tissue is proportional to the amount of
glucose utilisation. Increased consumption of glucose is characteristic of
most cancers and is in part related to overexpression of the GLUT glucose
transporters and increased hexokinase activity. [18F]FDG PET has been
proven to be a sensitive imaging modality for detection, staging,
restaging and therapy response assessment in oncology [1–15]. [18F]
FDG PET/CT provides essential information for radiation treatment
planning, helping with critical decisions when delineating tumour vol­
umes [16–18].
CT uses a combined X-ray transmission source and detector system
rotating around the patient to generate tomographic images represent­
ing linear attenuation coefficients or ‘tissue density’. CT allows not only
attenuation correction of the PET data but also the visualisation of
morphological and anatomical structures with a high spatial resolution.
Anatomical and morphological information derived from CT can be used
to improve the localisation, extent and characterisation of lesions
detected by [18F]FDG PET.
These guidelines focus on the use of [18F]FDG PET/CT whole body
imaging in oncology, where PET/CT has become an indispensable im­
aging modality in many cancer types for staging and restaging, assess­
ment of response to therapy and follow-up. Other indications for [18F]
FDG PET/CT (e.g. its use in infection and inflammation, cardiac and
brain imaging, etc.) are the subject of other, specific guidelines on these
topics [19,20]. However, aspects relating to reproducibility and
repeatability as well as PET/CT system performance harmonisation are
valid for non-onocological whole body [18F]FDG PET/CT as well. Whole
body imaging with other radiopharmaceuticals, whether radiolabelled
with 18F or other PET-isotopes (e.g. PSMA-based labelled with 68Ga,
64Cu, 89Zr or 18F) are also subject of other pertinent guidelines [21,22].
This guideline does not include recommendations for quantitative per­
formance of combined or integrated PET and MRI systems (PET/MRI),
which are also addressed elsewhere [23]. Yet, many aspects are appli­
cable to PET/MRI studies as well, including adherence to EARL stan­
dards when PET/MR is used for oncology examinations.
3. Goals
The purpose of these guidelines is to assist physicians in recom­
mending, performing, interpreting and reporting the results of [18F]FDG
PET/CT for oncological imaging of adult and paediatric patients. PET is
a quantitative imaging technique and therefore requires a common
quality control (QC)/quality assurance (QA) procedure to maintain the
accuracy and precision of quantitation [24]. Repeatability and repro­
ducibility are two essential requirements for any quantitative
R. Boellaard et al.
The EANM Journal 1 (2025) 100006
2



---
[PAGE 3/12]

measurement and/or imaging biomarker. Repeatability relates to the
uncertainty in obtaining the same result in the same patient when they
are examined more than once on the same system (e.g. using 2 different
injections on 2 different days within a short interval of 1–7 days).
However, imaging biomarkers should also have adequate reproduc­
ibility, i.e. the ability to yield the same result in the same patient when
that patient is examined on different systems and at different imaging
sites. Adequate repeatability and reproducibility are essential for the
clinical management of patients and the use of [18F]FDG PET/CT within
multicentre trials. A common standardised imaging procedure will help
promote the appropriate use of [18F]FDG PET/CT imaging and increase
the value of publications and, therefore, their contribution to
evidence-based medicine. Moreover, consistency in numerical values
between platforms and institutions that acquire the data will potentially
enhance the role of semi-quantitative and quantitative image interpre­
tation. Precision and accuracy are additionally important as [18F]FDG
PET/CT is used to evaluate tumour response as well as for diagnosis,
prognosis and staging/restaging. While vendor-specific settings for
image processing of (high-end) systems are recommended for visual
assessment of the procedures, both the previous and these new guide­
lines specifically aim to achieve standardised uptake value (SUV) har­
monisation in multicentre settings, allowing direct comparison of
quantitative PET data across PET centres. In addition, use of diagnostic,
prognostic and/or predictive models that rely on quantitative PET data
require that [18F]FDG uptake measures are repeatable and reproducible
[25]. Therefore, standardization and harmonisation is not only impor­
tant in multicentre studies, but also required to allow clinical in­
vestigators to use these quantitative data for decision-making or patient
stratification when based on quantitative PET information.
These guidelines address general information about [18F]FDG PET/
CT and are provided to help the physician, physicist and technologist
perform, interpret and document quantitative [18F]FDG PET/CT exam­
inations, but concentrate on harmonisation/standardisation of diag­
nostic quality and quantitative information in oncology imaging of adult
patients. These guidelines present a standardised imaging procedure for
static [18F]FDG PET/CT data acquisition, QC and QA. Quantification of
[18F]FDG PET/CT is defined as quantification using SUVs [26] because
the SUV represents the most commonly used semi-quantitative param­
eter for analysis of tracer uptake. Furthermore, this new version of the
guidelines only addresses combined or integrated whole-body 3D
PET/CT systems.
These guidelines build upon the earlier published European pro­
cedure guidelines for quantitative [18F]FDG PET and PET/CT for tumour
imaging [27,28] and the SNMMI procedure guidelines for tumour im­
aging with [18F]FDG PET/CT [29]. For a detailed history of the docu­
ment, refer to section History of the document. For [18F]FDG PET/CT
studies in paediatric patients, refer to the specific guidelines [30].
4. Definitions
• An integrated or multimodality PET/CT system is a combination of a
PET and a CT system with a single, conjoined patient handling
system.
• PET/CT allows sequential acquisition of PET and CT portions of the
examination with the patient in the same position for both exami­
nations. Both datasets are intrinsically coregistered.
• An [18F]FDG PET/CT examination may cover various coaxial imag­
ing ranges; these ranges are described as follows, with different de­
nominations depending on European standard (GL 1.0/2.0) or US
standard (defined in Current Procedural Terminology 2005):
o Whole-body imaging: From the top of the head to the feet.
o Torso imaging: Base of the skull (or top of the head) to mid-thigh.
Covers most of the relevant portions of the body in many onco­
logical diseases.
o Limited-area tumour imaging: For the evaluation of tumour-
related changes in a limited portion of the body.
o Whole-body or torso imaging combined with additional imaging of
dedicated areas (e.g. brain, head/neck, pelvis): Dedicated area
imaging combined with whole-body or torso imaging.
• In PET/CT studies attenuation correction and scatter correction are
performed using the CT data.
• A PET/CT examination can include different types of CT scan
depending on the CT characteristics, the dose and the use (or not) of
oral and/or intravenous contrast agents:
o Low-dose CT scan: CT scan that is performed only for attenuation
correction (CT-AC) and anatomical correlation of PET findings
(with reduced voltage and/or current of the X-ray tube settings), i.
e. a low-dose CT is not intended a priori for state-of-the-art
radiological interpretation.
o Diagnostic CT scan: CT scan with or without intravenous and/or
oral contrast agents, commonly using higher X-ray doses than low-
dose scans. Moreover, depending on the clinical application,
breath hold procedures are used for thoracic/lung imaging.
Diagnostic CT scan should be performed according to applicable
local or national radiological protocols and guidelines.
5. Common clinical indications
Although for many cancer types [18F]FDG PET/CT has become an
indispensable imaging modality at both the national and the interna­
tional levels, some striking differences between individual countries
remain (number of PET/CT scanners, accessibility, reimbursement).
Indications for [18F]FDG PET/CT include [28,31], but are not limited
to, the following:
• Differentiation of benign from malignant lesions.
• Identification of an unknown primary tumour when metastatic dis­
ease is discovered as the first manifestation of cancer or when the
patient presents with a paraneoplastic syndrome.
• Staging and restaging patients with known malignancies.
• (Early) monitoring of the effects of therapy on known malignancies.
• Determining whether residual abnormalities detected on physical
examination or on other imaging studies following treatment
represent tumour or post-treatment fibrosis or necrosis.
• Detecting tumour recurrence, especially in the presence of elevated
tumour markers.
• Selection of the region of tumour most likely to yield the most
optimal diagnostic information for biopsy.
• Prognosis and/or tumor treatment response prediction.
• Facilitating and guiding radiation therapy planning.
The evidence underpinning the clinical utility, impact on patient
management, (cost) effectiveness, etc. of [18F]FDG PET/CT imaging
continues to expand in the field of oncology and beyond. Therefore, an
exhaustive list of indications would not be possible and would not be an
appropriate reflection of the rapidly expanding state-of-the-art.
Specific elements for [18F]FDG PET/CT in inflammation and infec­
tion imaging, cardiology and neurology are not addressed in this
guideline, but described elsewhere [20,32].
6. Regulatory issues
There is consistent progress in the field, with regular new literature
and registration of [18F]FDG for several indications by the European
Medicines Agency. In the United States, [18F]FDG is approved by the
Food and Drug Administration for all oncological indications.
7. Qualifications and responsibilities of personnel
In most countries in Europe, the certified nuclear medicine physician
who supervises the examination, writes and signs the report is respon­
sible for the procedure, according to national laws and rules. In other
R. Boellaard et al.
The EANM Journal 1 (2025) 100006
3



---
[PAGE 4/12]

European countries, the referring physician or a practitioner has distinct
responsibilities for the requested diagnostic procedures. In the United
States, see the SNMMI Guideline for General Imaging [29] and the [18F]
FDG PET/CT Quantitative Imaging Biomarker Alliance (QIBA) profile
[33].
8. Procedure/specification of the examination
8.1. Request
The request for the examination should include sufficient and
adequate medical information to justify the PET/CT examination and
should at least include the diagnosis and clinical questions to be
answered.
8.2. Review of the medical history
The medical record should be reviewed with a special focus on the
diagnosis (type of cancer and known sites), oncological history and
relevant comorbidities, which may result in artefacts or interfere with
image quality and/or may decrease sensitivity and specificity (e.g.
concurrent infection/inflammation, diabetes mellitus, pertinent medi­
cations). A short interview with the patient and/or family can help
clarify some of these issues. Relevant laboratory tests should be
considered. The results of prior imaging studies should be available for
review, including planar radiography, CT, MRI, bone scanning and
previous other PET/CTs or PET/MRI, with [18F]FDG or other tracers (e.
g. for somatostatin receptor or prostate specific membrane antigen).
Relevant prior studies should be directly compared with current imaging
findings when possible. The following list shows all aspects that should
be considered in the review:
• Tumour type (if known) and known tumour sites.
• Oncological history and relevant comorbidities (especially infection/
inflammation and diabetes mellitus).
• Neurological or psychiatric clinical presentations, including sus­
pected neurological paraneoplastic syndromes.
• Height and body weight (these must be determined precisely in the
case of SUV measurements, see below). Weight must be measured
directly prior to each [18F]FDG PET/CT examination (also in the case
of longitudinal studies) because body weight often changes during
the course of disease.
• Serum glucose with date and time measured.
• Full overview of current and recently used medication, especially
(but not limited to) antidiabetic medication, corticosteroids, growth
factors and sedatives. In the case of therapy evaluation: type and date
of last relevant treatment including surgery, chemotherapy, radio­
therapy and supportive care, such as e.g. administration of growth
factors).
• Results of other imaging tests (especially CT, MRI and previous PET/
CT), including dates of acquisition, full reports and access to these
images on a picture archiving and communication system (PACS)
server of the referred studies and ideally the ability to view the im­
ages directly for comparison.
• Allergy to contrast agents. If an [18F]FDG PET/CT examination with
intravenous CT contrast agent is strictly necessary the referring
physician must indicate the premedication protocol to prepare the
patient.
• Renal function. Creatinine and/or glomerular filtration should be
evaluated. It is recommended to follow the recommendations by
European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR, see e.g. https
://www.esur.org/esur-guidelines-on-contrast-agents/).
If
renal
function is suboptimal and an [18F]FDG PET/CT examination with
intravenous CT contrast agent is necessary, then the referring
physician can initiate the protocol for prevention of nephrotoxicity.
9. Patient preparation and precautions
The main purpose of patient preparation is to reduce tracer uptake in
normal tissue (kidneys, bladder, skeletal muscle, myocardium, brown
fat) while maintaining and optimising tracer uptake in the target
structures (tumour tissue) and keeping patient radiation exposure levels
as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA). A generally applicable pro­
tocol is outlined below.
9.1. Pregnancy (suspected or confirmed)
For any diagnostic procedure in a female patient known or suspected
to be pregnant, a clinical decision is necessary in which the benefits are
weighed against the possible harm. The International Commission on
Radiological Protection (ICRP) reports that for an adult patient the
administration of 259 MBq (7 mCi) of [18F]FDG results in an absorbed
radiation dose of 4.7 mGy to the nonpregnant uterus (i.e. 1.8 × 10−2
mGy/MBq) [34]. Direct measurements of [18F]FDG uptake in a case
study suggested somewhat higher doses than are currently provided in
standard models [35]. A pregnancy test may help with the decision,
provided the 10 day postovulation blackout is understood. In the event
of doubt and in the absence of an emergency, the 10 day rule should be
adopted. In Europe, national guidelines may apply.
9.2. Breastfeeding
The International Commission for Radiation Protection (ICRP) does
not recommend interruption of breastfeeding after [18F]FDG adminis­
tration since little [18F]FDG is excreted in the milk [36]. However, as the
lactating breast accumulates [18F]FDG, it is suggested that contact be­
tween mother and child is limited for 4 h after injection of [18F]FDG to
reduce the radiation dose that the infant receives from external exposure
to radiation emitted by the mother [36]. It is recommended that the
infant is breastfed just before injection, to maximise the time between
the injection and the next feed. Breast milk may be expressed and fed to
the infant via a bottle for 12 h by a carer to help maximise the inter­
ruption in close, prolonged contact between the infant and the mother.
9.3. Instructions to patients
Nondiabetic patients should not consume any food or liquids other
than plain (unflavoured) water for at least 4 h prior (ideally 6 hours) to
the start of the [18F]FDG PET/CT study (i.e. with respect to the time of
injection of [18F]FDG). In practice, this means that patients scheduled to
undergo the [18F]FDG PET/CT study in the morning should eat nothing
after midnight and preferably should have only a light meal (no alcohol
and only a small amount of carbohydrates) on the evening prior to the
[18F]FDG PET/CT study. Those scheduled for an afternoon [18F]FDG
PET/CT study may have a light breakfast at least 4 h prior to their PET/
CT examination appointment. Medication can be taken as prescribed.
• Adequate prehydration is important to ensure a sufficiently low
concentration of [18F]FDG in the urine (fewer artefacts) and for ra­
diation safety. For these reasons, consumption of 1 L of water during
the 2 h prior to injection is suggested. Where necessary, the volume
of water in the oral contrast agent if given for a diagnostic CT scan
can be included in this estimate.
• Coffee or caffeinated beverages are not recommended because even
if “sugar-free” they may contain traces of simple carbohydrates and
have the potential to induce stimulant effects; this may also be the
case for other “sugar-free” beverages.
• Parenteral nutrition and intravenous fluids containing glucose
should be discontinued at least 4 h before the time of [18F]FDG in­
jection. In addition, any infusion used to administer intravenous
prehydration should not contain glucose.
R. Boellaard et al.
The EANM Journal 1 (2025) 100006
4



---
[PAGE 5/12]

• During the injection of [18F]FDG and the subsequent uptake phase,
the patient should remain seated or lying down and silent (this is
particularly important for head and neck cancer patients) to mini­
mise [18F]FDG uptake in muscles. The patient should be kept warm,
ideally starting 30–60 min before the injection of [18F]FDG and
continue to be kept warm throughout the uptake period and scan to
minimise [18F]FDG accumulation in brown fat (especially relevant in
winter or if the room is air-conditioned).
• Patients should avoid strenuous exercise for at least 6 h before the
[18F]FDG PET/CT study, and preferably for 24 h.
• Patients should void immediately prior to the PET/CT examination
to reduce bladder activity.
• The patient should be able to lie still in the PET/CT camera for the
whole scan (e.g. typically around 10–45 min). A specific inquiry
about claustrophobia at the time the patient is scheduled for the
study may decrease the number of nondiagnostic studies and can­
cellations, and allow premedication planning.
• If possible, the patient should put their arms above their head (except
for dedicated head and neck imaging); proper support devices (e.g.
foam pallets) provided by the manufacturers should be employed
whenever feasible.
• When a diagnostic contrast-enhanced CT examination with intrave­
nous contrast agent is to be performed, specific instructions must be
followed (see later in these guidelines).
9.4. Serum glucose level before [18F]FDG administration
The main objectives of preparation with fasting are to ensure
euglycaemia and low insulin levels in the blood, as insulin is directly
responsible for glucose uptake by non-tumour cells. Although efforts
should be made to decrease blood glucose to normal levels (typically 4–7
mmol/L) and insulinaemia to low levels, if the study is indicated in a
patient with unstable (“brittle”) or poorly controlled diabetes, hyper­
glycaemia should not represent an absolute contraindication to the
study, as fasting hyperglycaemia may not hamper the clinical value of
[18F]FDG PET. Therefore, we suggest recording the blood glucose level
and any other information that could be relevant for interpretation of
the examination.
Blood glucose level must be measured prior to administering [18F]
FDG. A glucose meter (or glucometer) or a similar bedside device
capable of performing overall blood glucose measurements can be used
for this purpose, but a blood glucose test must be performed with a
calibrated and validated method if plasma glucose level is to be used for
correction of SUV measurements [37].
It is good practice to check the blood glucose of the patient on arrival
at the imaging centre to ensure the level is not too low (not below 4
mmol/L, about 70 mg/dL) or too high, since this may require
rescheduling.
For clinical studies:
• If the plasma glucose level is lower than 11 mmol/L (about 200 mg/
dL), the [18F]FDG PET/CT study can be performed.
• If the plasma glucose level is higher than or equal to 11 mmol/L
(about 200 mg/dL), the [18F]FDG PET/CT study should ideally be
rescheduled, but taking into consideration the patient’s circum­
stances (as above) or the patient excluded if participating in a clinical
trial according to protocol.
For studies for which SUV based quantification is required:
• The recommended upper plasma glucose levels may range between 7
and 8.3 mmol/L (126 mg/dL and 150 mg/dL) [33]; the upper
threshold should be specified in the study protocol or as per insti­
tutional code of practice. Patients who fall outside the specified
range of serum glucose levels may need to be excluded from the
study or rescheduled, but reference should be made to the specific
study protocol or local clinical code of practice to make the decision.
It should be stated whether the SUV reported is corrected for glucose
and, if so, values should be given with and without glucose correction
although this is not common practice in many clinical centres. Glucose
levels should be recorded and reported, to allow the calculation of
glucose corrected SUV post hoc. Note that specifically in response
assessment studies, blood glucose levels may change with therapy.
There are few studies in the literature using glucose normalised SUVs
and there is no clear evidence that glucose normalisation improves
response monitoring or prediction of outcome as compared to uncor­
rected SUVs. It is also unclear whether the concept of glucose normal­
isation is valid for malignant tumours. Glucose normalisation implies
that glucose metabolic rates are tightly regulated. In some malignancies
with unregulated glucose metabolic rates, uncorrected SUVs can be
more stable than glucose corrected SUVs [38].
It is possible to reduce blood glucose in patients just above the cut-off
threshold by asking them to hydrate while ambulating and recheck the
blood glucose periodically until an acceptable level has been achieved.
Insulin should not be given to reduce glucose levels (this leads to
altered pharmacokinetics and biodistribution, including high muscle
uptake of [18F]FDG).
9.4.1. Diabetes
Performing [18F]FDG PET/CT in patients with diabetes mellitus re­
quires specific recommendations, as suggested in the Supplemental File
1 (Preparation of patients with diabetes mellitus). As treatment regi­
mens for diabetes may vary, it is recommended to consult with the local
endocrinology team for a tailored approach to achieve optimal patient
preparation.
Kidney failure [18F]FDG imaging can be performed in patients with
kidney failure, although the image quality may be suboptimal and prone
to interpretation pitfalls [39].
Recommendations for image optimisation in specific circumstances:
o There is no reason for routine administration of sedatives (e.g. short-
acting benzodiazepines) in adult patients. Sedatives may be consid­
ered for patients with head and neck tumours to reduce muscle up­
take or for claustrophobic patients. A number of agents have been
tried reduce brown fat uptake (e.g. 5 mg of intravenous diazepam,
administered 10 min prior to [18F]FDG [40], or 80 mg of propranolol
given orally 2 h before [18F]FDG administration [41], but conflicting
results have been reported [42]. Patients should be instructed not to
drive and to travel home accompanied after sedation.
o When patients are referred for evaluation of lesions in the heart or
very close to the myocardium, additional dietary recommendations
can be helpful. While there are many options for decreasing normal
glucose uptake by the myocardium, common recommendations may
include instructions for the patient to follow a low carbohydrate diet
for 24 h prior to the PET/CT study, or at least to eat a low carbo­
hydrate meal before starting the 6 h period of fasting [43,44]. A low
carbohydrate diet helps switch the myocardium from using glucose
to fatty acids as an energy source, reducing myocardial glucose
uptake.
o If desired, for additional clinical information, a dedicated brain [18F]
FDG PET/CT scan can be performed using the same injected dose
prior to or directly after the half- or whole-body [18F]FDG PET/CT
scan. The brain acquisition procedure and uptake time should be
chosen following the recent guideline for brain [18F]FDG PET/CT
imaging [45]. The image quality of a brain scan performed as part of
a body [18F]FDG PET/CT examination is not sufficiently high for
detailed diagnostic purposes due to inadequate spatial resolution,
voxel dimensions, signal to noise ratio, head fixation issues and
possibly reconstruction algorithms. Dedicated brain scans should be
performed with arm alongside the body.
R. Boellaard et al.
The EANM Journal 1 (2025) 100006
5



---
[PAGE 6/12]

o Clinical experience suggests that proper hydration mitigates urinary
activity causing problems in the image interpretation of abdominal/
pelvic tumours. If patients are properly hydrated before imaging,
delayed imaging or furosemide intervention is rarely necessary. It is
noted that some centres use transurethral catheterisation for this
purpose but the possible risk of urinary tract infection may outweigh
the potential benefits of improved image quality. If the pelvis is a site
of particular concern, the CT scan may be performed first from the
head to the pelvis followed by the PET scan in the opposite direction.
This protocol minimises the time delay between the CT and [18F]FDG
imaging of the pelvis, and any change in bladder volume between the
two scans.
o When a diagnostic CT scan with intravenous contrast agent
enhancement is to be performed as part of the [18F]FDG PET/CT
study, indications, contraindications and restrictions have to be
assessed by a qualified physician.
o Administration of the intravenous contrast agent should be timed to
the portovenous phase. If modification of the timing is considered,
please refer to the applicable guidelines for performing contrast-
enhanced CT.
o Medication that interacts with intravenous contrast agent (e.g.
metformin for the treatment of diabetes) and relevant medical his­
tory (e.g. compromised renal function) should be taken into
consideration:
o As per ESUR guideline on the use of intravenous contrast agents,
patients with eGFR >30 mL/min/1.73 m2 and no evidence of acute
kidney injury can continue to take metformin normally. Patients
with eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 or with acute kidney injury
should stop taking metformin from the time of contrast medium
administration. eGFR should be measured within 48 hours and
metformin can be restarted if renal function has not changed
significantly.
o Renal function should be checked prior to contrast agent admin­
istration in all patients considered at risk of contrast agent neph­
rotoxicity. Routine creatinine testing prior to contrast agent
administration may not be necessary in all patients, depending on
national and local guidelines for contrast administration; the
major indications are age over 60 years, history of preexisting
renal disease or impairment (including dialysis, kidney transplant,
single kidney, renal cancer and renal surgery), history of diabetes
mellitus, history of hypertension requiring medical therapy or use
of metformin/metformin-containing drug combinations. Patients
who do not have one of the above risk factors may not require a
baseline serum creatinine determination before intravenous
iodinated contrast agent administration. Estimated glomerular
filtration rate is a better predictor of renal dysfunction than
creatinine level alone. Patients with a high risk of nephrotoxicity
are those with creatinine >130 μmol/L (1.5 mg/dL) and/or eGFR
<30 mL/min/1.73 m2. If renal function assessment is required, a
creatinine level and estimated glomerular filtration rate within the
preceding 4 weeks is sufficient in most clinical settings, although it
seems prudent to shorten this interval for inpatients and those with
a new or heightened risk factor of renal dysfunction [46], see also
ESUR guideline on the use of intravenous contrast agents.
o Metformin is an oral hypoglycaemic agent, whose use is governed
by international guidelines as episodes of acute kidney injury have
been associated with its use alongside contrast agents. If the risk of
nephrotoxicity is high, metformin can be reinstituted only after
renal function has been reevaluated and found to be normal. An
alternative drug for glycaemic control should be considered during
this time [46].
o Under some circumstances SGLT2 inhibitors (eg Dapagliflozin,
Empagliflozin and Canagliflozin), often used as renal/cardiovas­
cular protective agents in those at risk, have been associated with
peri-procedure risk (euglycaemic ketosis/ketoacidosis) – if well-
hydrated this should not be a prevalent risk, but their use will
impact renal/bladder uptake – if this is a concern they should be
omitted 48 hours before and 48 hours after the scan
o The risk factors for contrast agent-induced nephropathy must be
considered. The more important ones include: preexisting renal
insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, dehydration or volume depletion,
concurrent nephrotoxic drugs, high dose of contrast agent, age
greater than 70 years and cardiovascular disease. Patients with
normal renal function are at very low risk of contrast agent-
induced nephropathy. Recommendations for preventing contrast
agent-induced nephropathy in patients at risk are given in the
ESUR guideline.
o Risk factors for adverse reactions to contrast agent must be
assessed. A previous reaction to contrast agent is the most
important of all the risk factors. Adverse reactions are classified as
either idiosyncratic (anaphylactoid) or non-idiosyncratic. Life-
threatening reactions are rare. Premedication reduces the risk of
recurrent anaphylaxis, but in patients with a history of a severe
reaction, an unenhanced CT examination is preferred [47].
o For CT imaging of the abdomen or pelvis, an intraluminal
gastrointestinal contrast agent may be administered to improve
visualisation of the gastrointestinal tract on CT (unless it is
considered unnecessary for the clinical indication or it is medically
contraindicated). Nowadays, water or water-based contrast agents
are often used as intraluminal contrast agents that provide
improved image quality with reduced artefacts [48]. Water can be
an effective contrast agent allowing better or equal distention in
the bowel and better or equal diagnostic clarity compared with
routine barium contrast agents.
o Some patients have difficulties such as claustrophobia, dyspnoea
or inability to lie still for the duration of the scan. These patients
should be carefully evaluated and an effort made to solve the
problem with minimum consequences for the patient and the
quality of the scan; sometimes, however, a solution cannot be
found even if the study is repeated or rescheduled for another day.
Occasionally sedatives can be of help in patients suffering claus­
trophobia. These issues should be noted in order to avoid potential
pitfalls and to facilitate interpretation of suboptimal scans.
• In case of pregnancy where the PET scan is crucial, the scan can be
performed with an ultra-low injected dose and prolonged scan
duration and an ultra-low dose CT for attenuation correction, pref­
erably on a long axial field of view scanner [49–51].
10. Radiopharmaceutical
• Product: 18F-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose ([18F]FDG)
• Nuclide: Fluorine-18
• Dosage/activity: Dependent on the system, time per bed position and
the patient weight
• Administration: Intravenous
• Synthesis and quality control: as per regional guidelines e.g., Euro­
pean Pharmacopeia or US Pharmacopeia, using fully automated
synthesizers and a well-established method [52].
11. Recommendations for [18F]FDG dose and administered
activity
The minimum recommended administered [18F]FDG activity and
PET acquisition duration for each bed position must be adjusted so that
the product of the [18F]FDG activity and PET acquisition duration is
equal to or greater than the specifications given in Supplemental File 2.
Therefore, a higher activity may be used if it is necessary to reduce the
duration of the study or, preferably, a reduced activity may be used
whilst increasing the study duration, in accordance with ALARA
principles.
In the previous versions of this guideline two recommendations are
provided for determining the minimum [18F]FDG administered dose in
R. Boellaard et al.
The EANM Journal 1 (2025) 100006
6



---
[PAGE 7/12]

adults, which assume a linear and a quadratic [53] relationship,
respectively, between PET acquisition time per bed position, patient
weight and recommended [18F]FDG activity – see Supplemental File 2.
Compared with linear activity prescription, the quadratic scheme results
in a slightly higher administered activity for patients >75 kg; this
compensates for the lower signal to noise ratio (and hence degraded
image quality) due to excessive attenuation, which occurs when linear
activity prescription is applied.
In Supplemental File 2, specifications are given for standard short
axial field of view (<35 cm) or analogue PET/CT systems. These rec­
ommended activities are too high for more recent digital and large
axial field of view systems. For these systems, it is strongly rec­
ommended to follow the procedure provided by EARL [54,55]. In
many cases, this procedure has been performed and published [54,
55].
For children and adolescents, administered [18F]FDG activity should
adhere to the EANM or SNMMI recommendations on paediatric radio­
pharmaceutical administration [56–58] or national activity limits, if
national limits are lower. Furthermore, there are specific guidelines for
[18F]FDG PET/CT in paediatric oncology [30]. With the introduction of
large axial field of view/high sensitivity systems, opportunities to
further reduce activity to children or fetus and thus radiation dose
should be considered, but at this time there are insufficient data to
provide clear recommendations [50,51].
Supplemental File 3 lists the materials and procedures for prepara­
tion and administration of [18F]FDG and contrast agents. Supplemental
File 4 summarizes PET and CT acquisition protocols.
12. Checking for pitfalls
• Metal implants can cause severe artefacts in the CT image. Metal
artefact reduction techniques may be used to minimise these arte­
facts. When the CT data are used for attenuation correction of the
PET data, it should be considered that even when using metal arte­
fact reduction techniques, metal implants will likely result in
reduced PET image quality and will prevent proper quantification (at
and near the metal implant). [18F]FDG uptake should be confirmed
by inspecting the PET images without attenuation correction.
• In most PET/CT systems today, the measured radial FOV of the CT
scanner is smaller than that of the PET scanner. Truncating the CT
images causes reconstruction artefacts and thus inaccurate quanti­
fication of the PET study. When available, truncation correction al­
gorithms may be applied during image reconstruction (and/or
during processing of the CT data used for attenuation correction). As
the amount of truncation may vary across studies and patients, it will
be difficult to ensure proper quantification across studies and pa­
tients. It is, therefore, strongly recommended that any truncation of
the CT images is avoided. If available, the use of extended CT and
PET FOVs is recommended. It should be noted that truncation of the
CT images may occasionally seriously affect scatter correction
scaling as well, and may lead to inaccurate quantitative results.
• Make sure that all clocks (including the dose calibrators – the one at
the hospital and the one at the external laboratory dispensing the
[18F]FDG – and the PET/CT system) are synchronised and that this is
regularly checked. Consult the local service engineer when needed.
Clocks should be synchronised with the official local time to within 1
min (in the case of studies using 18F).
13. Image reconstruction
13.1. PET image reconstruction
The PET emission data must be corrected for geometrical response
and detector efficiency (normalisation), system dead time, random co­
incidences, scatter and attenuation (see also Supplemental File 4 for
specific recommendations regarding the use of contrast enhanced CT).
• All the corrections necessary to obtain quantitative image data
should be applied during the reconstruction process.
• During image reconstruction, matrix sizes, zoom factors, filters and
other reconstruction settings should be chosen such that recon­
structed images comply with EARL2 standards, in particular when
quantitative tumor uptake assessments are required [59,60]. Addi­
tional reconstructions may be applied that are optimized for visual
inspection and/or locally preferred. For lymphoma response to avoid
a positive bias in Deauville scores that may lead to treatment changes
(usually escalation) based on clinical trials that established the evi­
dence base using earlier technology reconstructions compliant with
EARL1 may be used [61–63].
• When available, time-of-flight information should be used during
reconstruction.
• Resolution modelling during reconstruction or other new recon­
struction or image processing methods may be applied. In the case of
multicentre studies or when quantification is required, the use of
these methods typically entails additional filtering during or after
image reconstruction in order to meet the EARL 2 standardised/
harmonised quantitative PET/CT system performance specifications
[59].
• Spatial filters applied during or after reconstruction should not
exceed a full-width at half-maximum of 7 mm, not even to mitigate
Gibbs artefacts when using resolution modelling. In these cases the
use of reconstructed images generated without resolution modelling
should be considered.
It is good clinical practice to perform reconstructions with and
without attenuation correction to identify potential reconstruction ar­
tefacts caused by the CT-AC. Both attenuation-corrected (AC-PET) and
non-attenuation-corrected PET (NAC-PET) images should be available
for interpretation and lesions seen on the AC-PET images may need to be
checked on the NAC-PET images, particularly when adjacent to highly
attenuating materials, such as contrast agent or metal implants.
Further standardisation of reconstruction settings is necessary to
obtain standardised and harmonised SUV recoveries. This requires
reconstruction settings to be chosen so as to achieve matching conver­
gence and spatial resolution across various systems and sites, especially
within a multicentre setting. These reconstruction settings should thus
be chosen to meet the multicentre QC harmonising specifications for
both calibration QC and image quality/SUV recovery QC, for example as
described on the EARL website. Indicative reconstruction settings for
each system type are provided on request through EARL. At present,
EARL standards 2 are the preferred performance standards, including for
new large axial field of view systems [55].
It may be appropriate to perform multiple PET reconstructions with
different reconstruction settings. For quantitative assessment of the
[18F]FDG PET/CT study, the approved reconstruction settings, which
meet the EARL 2 standardised performance standards, should be used.
An additional reconstruction designed for optimal visual assessment
may be performed for qualitative interpretation only. This reconstruc­
tion may be performed, for example, in order to maximise lesion
detectability or to meet local preferences for visual interpretation of the
[18F]FDG PET/CT study, as was suggested and demonstrated by Refs.
[64,65]. Similar strategies may be applied for different PET/CT systems
as well, provided quantitative interpretations/analyses are performed
using the EARL 2 standards approved reconstruction settings.
13.2. CT image reconstruction
For diagnostic CT scans, acquisition parameters should be deter­
mined according to specific or national radiology society guidelines. The
CT data that are acquired during the PET/CT study are usually recon­
structed using filtered back projection. Recently introduced iterative
reconstruction methods for CT data may be applied, if available on the
PET/CT system. Depending on the CT protocol and the clinical case,
R. Boellaard et al.
The EANM Journal 1 (2025) 100006
7



---
[PAGE 8/12]

separate CT reconstructions may be performed for diagnostic purposes
and CT-AC. The reconstructions will probably differ in their slice
thickness, slice overlap, filter etc. In addition to the reconstruction
kernel that modulates the image characteristics within the slices (i.e.
spatial resolution, edge enhancement and noise texture), a longitudinal
filter in the z-dimension is often used to optimise the resolution in the
axial direction and to modify the slice sensitivity profiles. The measured
attenuation values (μ) are normalised to the density of water (μwater) in
order to assign a device-independent numerical value in the framework
of the reconstruction:
CT value = Hounsfield units = 1, 000 x (μ −μwater)/μwater
In modern CT systems the spatial resolution in the z-direction is
almost as high as the transaxial resolution and nearly isotropic, allowing
high-quality images in the coronal and sagittal views. Additionally,
postprocessing such as volume rendering or maximum intensity pro­
jections benefit from using the high-quality reconstructed CT data.
14. Image analysis and interpretation
[18F]FDG PET images scaled according to SUV should be provided
with and without attenuation correction for image analysis/reading.
The data without attenuation correction are useful to assess attenuation
correction artefact due to patient motion and/or PET versus CT
misalignment. On all slices (of the attenuation-corrected data) quanti­
tative information with respect to size and [18F]FDG uptake should be
available. Images should be evaluated using software that is able to
display fused PET and CT data. Monitors used for image viewing should
be approved for clinical use in radiology and nuclear medicine. Perfor­
mance and settings for monitors should be in line with published stan­
dards (e.g. the Medical Electrical Safety Standards, IEC 60601-1/EN
60601-1; the Medical ECM Standards, IEC 60601-1-2, EN 60601-1-2; or
national guidelines). Further, viewing conditions (e.g. background light)
must be appropriate to ensure adequate image inspection. Image data
should be stored on an approved PACS system and in DICOM format;
further details and recommendations regarding image data format for
storage can be found in the QIBA [18F]FDG PET/CT profile [33].
The presence or absence of abnormal [18F]FDG accumulation on the
PET images, especially focal accumulation, in combination with the
intensity of uptake and anatomical size should be evaluated. Absence of
tracer accumulation in anatomical abnormalities seen on the CT scan or
other imaging may be particularly significant. When appropriate, the
report should correlate PET/CT findings with those of other diagnostic
tests, interpret them in that context and consider them in relation to the
clinical data. For response assessment, the images should be viewed over
the same dynamic range, i.e. a fixed scale; for example, from SUV = 0 to
SUV = 10 using an inverse linear scale for PET images and an appro­
priate colour scale for fused images.
Both non attenuation corrected and attenuation-corrected images
may need to be reviewed to identify artefacts caused by contrast agents,
metal implants and/or patient motion. In clinical trials, criteria for vi­
sual and quantitative analysis should be defined a priori within the study
protocol.
SUV is increasingly used in clinical studies in addition to visual as­
sessments. SUV is a measurement of the uptake in a tumour normalised
on the basis of a distribution volume. Most of the published literature
relates to SUV (normalised to body weight). SUV normalised to lean
body mass (LBM) is referred to as SUL [66], and is a recommended
quantitative measure of [18F]FDG uptake. SUL should preferably be
calculated alongside SUV, as follows:
SUL = ActVOI (kBq/mL)/[Actadministered (MBq)/LBM (kg)]
The following calculation is applied in the case of plasma glucose
correction:
SUglu = ActVOI (kBq/mL)
× Glucplasma (mmol/L)
/[{
Actadministered (MBq)
/
LBM (kg)
}
× 5.0 (mmol/L)
]
where ActVOI is the activity concentration measured in the volume of
interest (VOI) and Actadministered is the net administered activity cor­
rected for the physical decay of [18F]FDG to the start of acquisition and
corrected for the residual activity in the syringe and/or administration
lines and system. LBM is calculated according to the formula of Jan­
mahasatian et al. [67]:
LBMM = 9, 270 × weight / (6, 680 + 216 × BMI)
LBMF = 9, 270 × weight / (8, 780 + 244 × BMI)
where LBMM and LBMF are the LBM for males and females, and BMI is
body mass index (weight/height2), and weight and height are in kilo­
grams and metres, respectively. These formulas are more realistic than
the previously used James formulas, which fail at weights greater than
about 120 kg [68]. Patient height, weight and gender should be reported
to allow other SUV normalisations, such as weight and body surface
area. In these cases LBM is replaced by body weight and body surface
area, respectively, in the SUL equations given above.
The use of SUL may be preferred for response assessment studies
when large changes in body weight may occur during the course of the
treatment. As stated above, it is recommended plasma glucose levels be
measured using validated methodology and that SUL be calculated with
and without plasma glucose correction in all response monitoring
studies. Note that the measured glucose content (Glucplasma) is normal­
ised for an overall population average of 5.0 mmol/L so that the SULs
with and without correction for glucose content (SULglu and SUL,
respectively) are numerically practically identical (on average) [69].
14.1. Physiological [18F]FDG distribution and interpretation criteria
Accumulation of [18F]FDG can normally be seen in the brain, heart,
kidneys and urinary tract at 60 min after injection [70]. The brain has a
high uptake of [18F]FDG (about 7 % of injected activity). The myocar­
dium in a typical fasting state primarily uses free fatty acids, but after
glucose load it uses glucose. In the fasting state, [18F]FDG uptake in the
myocardium should be low, but this is variable. Unlike glucose, [18F]
FDG is excreted by the kidneys into the urine and accumulates in the
urinary tract. There is some degree of [18F]FDG accumulation in muscles
that can be increased following exercise, eating and insulin. Uptake in
the gastrointestinal tract varies from patient to patient and may be
increased, for example, in patients taking metformin. Uptake is common
in lymphoid tissue in Waldeyer’s ring and in the lymphoid tissue of the
terminal ileum and caecum. Physiological thymic uptake may be pre­
sent, especially in children and young adults. Uptake in brown fat may
be observed more commonly in young, thin patients and when the
ambient temperature is low. No physiological uptake is seen in cortical
bone (unless free 18F-fluoride is present as a contaminant), but bone
marrow uptake can be present to a variable degree in patients receiving
growth factors (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, G-CSF, and
granulocyte macrophage CSF, GM-CSF) and patients with marrow pro­
liferation for other reasons such as infection, inflammation or anaemia,
and following chemotherapy.
• Due to the high physiological [18F]FDG uptake in the brain, [18F]
FDG PET/CT is of limited value for detection of brain metastases.
Consequently, [18F]FDG PET/CT should not be used for the primary
detection or exclusion of brain metastases.
• Increased [18F]FDG uptake is observed in many neoplastic lesions,
but also in granulation tissue (e.g. wound healing), infections and
other inflammatory processes.
R. Boellaard et al.
The EANM Journal 1 (2025) 100006
8



---
[PAGE 9/12]

• Patterns of [18F]FDG uptake, established CT morphological criteria
and correlation with patient history, physical examination and other
imaging modalities may be helpful for differentiation between ma­
lignant and benign lesions.
• SUVs and related quantitative measures, such as metabolic tumour
volume (MTV) and total lesion glycolysis (TLG), have gained
increasing importance for therapy response monitoring [3,5,8,9,71,
72] and for prognostic assessment [73,74].
• There is no single lower limit for the intensity of [18F]FDG uptake
required for the detection of abnormal uptake within lesions as it
depends on the degree of contrast between the tumour and its im­
mediate surroundings. This contrast is related to several patho­
physiological factors, the most significant of which are histology
([18F]FDG avidity of the type of tumour), volume of vital tumour
cells, movement during ‘static’ acquisition (e.g. blurred signals in the
case of pulmonary foci) and physiological high uptake in adjacent
background. Furthermore, the sensitivity of [18F]FDG PET/CT may
be reduced in diabetic patients with elevated glucose levels.
• Although there are no conclusive data on the optimum interval be­
tween chemotherapy and [18F]FDG PET/CT, an interval of at least 10
days between the last treatment and the [18F]FDG PET/CT exami­
nation is generally considered adequate for measurement of response
[28]. This is because of the balance between any possible effects on
tumour metabolism (such as macrophage impairment) and systemic
effects (such as bone marrow activation following myelosuppression,
which may or may not be caused by growth factors). If an interval of
10 days is not possible, [18F]FDG PET/CT should be delayed as long
as possible after the previous chemotherapy administration (i.e. until
as close as possible to the next treatment cycle). This is to allow in­
flammatory effects including infiltration of macrophages which peak
a few days after chemotherapy to reduce and to image at the time of
maximum cell regrowth [75,76].
• The effects of growth factors (G-CSF and GM-CSF) on [18F]FDG
biodistribution (due to enhanced bone marrow uptake) generally last
for more than 2 weeks after the final administration, depending on
the formulation of growth factors used [28].
• It is assumed that the (side) effects of radiotherapy are longer-lasting;
investigation of patients with head and neck carcinoma treated with
radiation have shown that radiation-induced inflammation can be
seen on the [18F]FDG PET/CT images for up to 2–3 months after the
end of treatment [77]. Waiting 2 or 3 months following completion
of radiation therapy before obtaining a PET/CT scan is clinically
appropriate as patients rarely develop clinical problems requiring
[18F]FDG PET/CT imaging in the first 3 months after treatment.
• In patients who have undergone surgery, uptake depends on the
extent of surgery, the presence of infection/inflammation in the
wound, and how long after surgery images are acquired. For
example, there are few visible signs of a mediastinoscopy after 10
days but sternotomy signs will remain visible for months. Following
surgery, it is recommended to delay the [18F]FDG PET/CT for at least
6 weeks due to postsurgical inflammation if the scan is primarily
being done to assess the region around the surgical field. The delay of
6 weeks is also important if draining nodal stations, adjacent to the
surgical field, need to be evaluated.
Recommendations for documentation and reporting of [18F]FDG
PET/CT studies are summarized in Supplemental File 5.
15. Additional notes
The Royal College of Radiologists (RCR) (UK) provides recommen­
dations on reporting that include relevant aspects that should be taken
into account [78]:
• Limitations of staging: Every diagnostic test has a threshold. The
threshold used may vary depending on the implications for treatment
(to optimise diagnostic accuracy or according to treatment intent).
• Indeterminate lesions and management of uncertainty: Indetermi­
nate lesions should be the point of clinical–radiological discussion
and/or multidisciplinary review, if better characterisation of the
lesion will further affect patient management. The options for
resolving uncertainties are discussion, further investigation, inter­
vention and active monitoring (watch and wait).
• Multidisciplinary team meetings: Multidisciplinary team meetings
allow a team approach to patient management to take into account
and evaluate all aspects of the disease prior to individualised therapy
planning. It should be possible to review all relevant examinations in
a multidisciplinary meeting, especially when there is discrepancy
between clinical and imaging findings or other diagnostic uncer­
tainty. During the meetings, the results of the discussions should be
recorded, and discrepancies noted and, if necessary, reported as an
addendum to the imaging report. If additional tests are needed, these
should be scheduled as soon as possible. The presence of a reporting
radiologist or nuclear medicine specialist is essential [79].
• Imaging the treated patient or follow-up studies: The format of the
report should mirror the one at baseline. Reports of follow-up studies
must include clear statements regarding the detection of new disease
as this implies metabolic progression of disease. Also, descriptions on
the direction of change, indeterminate lesions and mixed responses
and findings at variance with one another that may reflect different
pathologies should be stated [33].
For further reading see also the SNMMI’s reporting guidance for
oncological [18F]FDG PET/CT imaging [80,81], the Royal College of
Radiologists’ recommendations on reporting [79] and the SNMMI’s
Procedure Standard for General Imaging [29].
16. Definitions of volumes of interest
Recommended tumour uptake metrics:
• The maximum as well as the peak SUV or SUL (SUVmax, SULmax and
SUVpeak, SULpeak) may be required for individual lesions if specified
in the study protocol and/or the lesion with the maximum uptake as
considered clinically relevant for routine clinical studies [82]. The
SUVmax and SULmax are measures of the single whole voxel in a
particular lesion with highest/maximum uptake. The maximum up­
take should be defined on original reconstructed PET images, i.e. no
additional rebinning, resampling, smoothing or any other manipu­
lation by the user is allowed. SUVpeak and SULpeak are based on a 3D
peak VOI with 1.0 mL spherical volume (1.2 cm diameter) [33,65]
positioned such that the average value across all positions within the
lesion is maximised. Often this coincides with the location (not
value) of SUVmax and SULmax, but this may not necessarily be the case
in all situations. SUVpeak and SULpeak are preferred to maximum
measurements as peak measures are less affected by noise levels and
variations in image qualities [54,59].
• The MTV and TLG are of increasing interest and these parameters or
their change may have prognostic and/or predictive value. These
parameters should therefore be reported, if available, depending on
the indication [74,83,84]. These metrics require a 3D delineation or
segmentation of the [18F]FDG avid lesions. When TLG and MTV are
used the applied segmentation method should be clearly specified
and described. An absolute threshold ≥4.0 with a minimum lesion
size of 3 mL has been agreed for measurement in aggressive lym­
phomas at baseline and recommended methods and/or benchmarks
will have recently become available [85].
• The MTV represents the volume of the given VOI (or sum of VOIs
sometimes also referred to as total MTV). TLG is the product of the
R. Boellaard et al.
The EANM Journal 1 (2025) 100006
9



---
[PAGE 10/12]

VOI average SUV or SUL (SUVmean, SULmean) multiplied by the cor­
responding MTV.
17. Some considerations with respect to semiautomated
percentage threshold-based delineation methods
The isocontour based on 41 % of SUVmax may correspond best with
the actual dimensions of the tumour, but only for lesions with high
tumour-to-background values and with relatively homogeneous tumor
[18F]FDG uptake distribution and background uptakes. This isocontour
method, however, does not always result in useful tumour volume def­
initions because of noise, tracer uptake inhomogeneities in tumour and
background and sometimes low tumour-to-background ratios. In that
case, a VOI based on a higher isocontour value or a fixed SUV threshold
can be chosen. For example, in lymphoma the SUV equal to 4 threshold
has been proposed as benchmark method [85].
When VOIs are generated (semi-)automatically, it is not always
possible to generate a reliable VOI if there is a high background or an
area of physiological high uptake (bladder, heart) close to/adjacent to
the lesion, or if there is low uptake in the lesion. Therefore, any (semi-)
automatically or artificial intelligence generated VOIs must be checked
visually and manually corrected, if needed.
Other tumour segmentation methods have been described for MTV
assessment and/or tumour delineation for radiotherapy planning in the
literature, such as contrast-oriented methods, gradient-based methods,
iterative methods and fuzzy clustering/segmentation methods [86] or
segmentations generated by artificial intelligence based methods
[87–90]. These, however, are not routinely used and not widely avail­
able for determining SUVs, although several methods outperform the
simple percentage threshold-based methods [86].
The authors realise the importance of using more accurate and
improved delineation methods and, indeed, the use of more advanced
methods is encouraged. In particular when [18F]FDG PET/CT-based
tumour delineations are used for radiotherapy planning, the delinea­
tion methods used and the tumour segmentation obtained should be
critically reviewed and supervised. Specific guidelines for the use of
[18F]FDG PET/CT in radiotherapy have been published elsewhere [91].
18. Liver uptake assessment
As suggested by Wahl et al. [66], assessment of liver SUL or SUV may
be a useful quality index of an [18F]FDG PET/CT study. Liver mea­
surements may be assessed by placing a spherical VOI of diameter 3 cm
in the upper right lobe of the liver, avoiding any pathological uptake and
organ boundaries, as indicated also in the QIBA [18F]FDG PET/CT
profile [33]. Liver SULs or SUVs should be reported along with lesion
SUL or SUV data. The study protocol or clinical guidelines should define
acceptable levels for liver SUL and required actions when specifications
are not met. For clinical studies that are quantitatively assessed, mean
liver SULs are expected to be within 1.0 and 2.2 (and mean liver SUVs
within 1.3 and 3.0). Liver SUVs or SULs outside this range may indicate
incorrect [18F]FDG administration or technical issues, and the use of
quantitative analysis of the study should be reconsidered and the un­
certainties discussed in the study report as appropriate [92].
19. Mediastinal uptake assessment
Measurement of the mediastinal blood pool can be very useful for
assessing what is considered normal or physiological [18F]FDG uptake.
In recent years, it has been used for the interim evaluation of response to
therapy in lymphoma and assessment of pulmonary nodules in the
Herder criteria. For pulmonary nodule assessment, it is calculated by
drawing several VOIs inside the thoracic aorta and measuring the
(mean) uptake inside the vessel, taking care not to include in the VOI the
vessel wall, where uptake can be slightly higher when there is vascular
inflammation. Blood pool SUL measurements are expected to be around
1.2 (and blood pool SUVs around 1.6) [66].
20. Tumor to liver ratio
Use of tumor to liver ratios (TLR) may be considered to mitigate
some PET uncertainties. By normalizing lesion uptake to liver, inac­
curacies in e.g. administered activity, patient weight, synchronization of
clocks and inaccurate PET/CT system calibration may be mitigated as
these factors cancel out in the TLR. When calculating TLR it is recom­
mended to use SUVpeak for lesion uptake and the SUVmean from a 3 cm
diameter spherical VOI to assess liver uptake, except for Deauville
scoring, which is currently based on SUVmax of lesion and liver, although
this may be revised in the near future. The TLR can be calculated as:
TLR = SUVpeak
lesion /
SUVmean
liver
By calculating TLR in this way TLR will be least sensitive to noise and
variations in image quality (among patients and scanners) [54,59,92].
In all cases reliability of liver SUV should be verified for the specific
study and/or trial. Many technical and biological factors can affect liver
uptake and TLR is not necessarily more reproducible than SUVs despite
mitigating some technical PET uncertainties [92].
Details on quality control and inter-institution PET/CT system per­
formance harmonisation are provided in Supplemental File 6.
21. Radiation exposure to the patient
The absorbed radiation dose of [18F]FDG PET/CT is the combination
of the radiation exposure from the radiopharmaceutical and the CT
study. The radiation dose of diagnostic CT is a matter of concern,
particularly for paediatric examinations. The mean dose for a CT scan
depends on applications, protocols and CT systems. Especially in chil­
dren but also in adults it is important to optimise the radiation exposure
with respect to the diagnostic question. Recent advances in technology
have allowed the radiation doses to be significantly reduced relative to a
conventional CT or PET examination [49].
The coefficient for effective dose from [18F]FDG in adults is 1.7 ×
10−2 mSv/MBq [93], i.e. about 3 mSv for an administered activity of
185 MBq. The radiation exposure related to a CT scan carried out as part
of an [18F]FDG PET/CT study depends on the intended use of the CT
study and may differ from patient to patient: the CT scan can be a very
low-dose scan (with lower tube voltage and current) for attenuation
correction only, or a low-dose or intermediate-dose scan for attenuation
correction and localisation of PET lesions, or additionally a diagnostic
CT scan can be indicated (in most cases with intravenous contrast agent
administration and deep inspiration for chest CT) for a full diagnostic CT
examination. The effective CT dose ranges from 1 to 20 mSv and may be
even higher for a static high-resolution diagnostic CT examination.
Given the variety of CT systems and protocols, the radiation exposure for
a [18F]FDG PET/CT study should be estimated specifically for a given
imaging system and protocol. Guidelines provided by European radio­
logical societies should be consulted regarding effective dose from the
CT examination.
The choice of imaging protocol strongly depends on the clinical
question and must be considered for every single case. Paediatric studies
require special attention. For the optimisation of [18F]FDG PET/CT
studies, dose reduction techniques should be considered.
22. Summary and key update points compared to the previous
version
In this version of the guideline substantial updates were made
compared with previous versions. These concern all aspects of the
guideline. Herewith a few most important changes are mentioned.
Regarding clinical indications and patient preparation, the recommen­
dations for handling of and controlling diabetic patients has been
R. Boellaard et al.
The EANM Journal 1 (2025) 100006
10



---
[PAGE 11/12]

substantially revised. Furthermore, with the ongoing development of
PET technology, recommendations regarding [18F]FDG activity and
performance standards have been updated. The optimal and minimal
recommended [18F]FDG activity should now preferably be based on a
series of experiments, as suggested by EARL, and image reconstructions
for quantitative studies should preferably be performed following EARL
standards 2. Other quantitative metrics have been discussed in more
detail with literature updates, such as recommendations to measure
metabolic tumour volume in aggressive lymphoma patients, and rec­
ommendations for deriving tumour to liver ratio have now been
provided.
23. History of the document
These guidelines provide an update of the previously published [18F]
FDG PET and PET/CT: EANM Procedure Guidelines for Tumour PET
Imaging: version 1.0 and version 2.0 [27,28], and the SNMMI Procedure
Guidelines for Tumour Imaging with 18F-[18F]FDG PET/CT 1.0 [29],
and address new technologies and developments. There have been
major changes in some sections, but others may have hardly been
changed. Indeed, there is similarity with the previous version and
certain sections have not been altered. Moreover, consideration is given
to compliance with international initiatives, such as those by the
Quantitative Imaging Biomarkers Alliance [33].
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ronald Boellaard: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft. Ken Herrmann: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft. Sally F. Barrington: Writing – review & editing, Writing – orig­
inal draft. Iain Cranston: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft. Felix M. Mottaghy: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft. Corneline J. Hoekstra: Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original draft. Thomas Beyer: Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original draft. Lucy C. Pike: Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original draft. Antoon TM. Willemsen: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft. Michael M. Graham: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft. Jos´ee M. Zijlstra: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft. Fred Verzijlbergen: Writing – review
& editing, Writing – original draft. Bernd J. Krause: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft. Albert J. Arends: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft. Wolfgang A. Weber: Writing – review
& editing, Writing – original draft. Otto S. Hoekstra: Writing – original
draft. Roberto C. Delgado Bolton: Writing – review & editing, Writing
– original draft. Giorgio Testanera: Writing – review & editing, Writing
– original draft. Sigrid Stroobants: Writing – review & editing, Writing
– original draft. Arturo Chiti: Writing – review & editing, Writing –
original draft. Francesco Giammarille: Writing – review & editing,
Writing – original draft. Christophe Deroose: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft. Wim JG. Oyen: Writing – review &
editing, Writing – original draft.
Declaration of competing interest
Ronald Boellaard has a research grant from Siemens Healthineers
and is the scientific chair of the EARL PET accreditation program. Jos´ee
Zijlstra has received research grants from Roche, Karyopharm, Gilead
and AbbVie. Christophe M Deroose is/has been a consultant for (fees
received by institution): Sirtex, Advanced Accelerator Applications,
Novartis, Ipsen, Terumo, PSI CRO, Immedica Pharma, Molecular Part­
ners, Nuclear Research and consultancy, and ITM. His institution has
received travel fees from: GE Healthcare, Sirtex. Wolfgang Weber has
received research support from Siemens Healthineers he has also acted
as a consultant for Siemens Healthineers. TUM University Hospital has a
license for the production of FDG (FDGTUM). Arturo Chiti is Editor-in-
Chief of The EANM Journal but had no role or involvement in the
evaluation or peer review of this manuscript. All other authors declared
no relevant conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgments
We thank the authors of the EANM [18F]FDG PET/CT guidelines
version 1.0 and 2.0 for their valuable contributions, which in part are
also incorporated in this new version of the guidelines. We acknowledge
the (previous and/or current) support of Richard P. Baum, Emile FI
Comans, Adriaan A. Lammertsma, Markus N. Lonsdale, Paul K. Marsden,
Mike O’Doherty, Anne M. Paans, Cornelia Schaefer-Prokop. Moreover,
we thank the EANM committees and national delegates for their critical
review of the manuscript. Finally, we gratefully acknowledge the
extensive support of the EANM Office in Vienna during the development
of these guidelines.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eanmj.2025.100006.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.