# SNMMI


---
[PAGE 1/16]

P R O C E D U R E S T A N D A R D
SNMMI Procedure Standard/EANM Practice Guideline for
Brain [18F]FDG PET Imaging, Version 2.0
Javier Arbizu1, Silvia Morbelli2,3, Satoshi Minoshima4, Henryk Barthel5, Philip Kuo6, Donatienne Van Weehaeghe7,
Neil Horner8, Patrick M. Colletti9, and Eric Guedj10
1Department of Nuclear Medicine, Clinica Universidad de Navarra, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; 2Nuclear Medicine Unit,
Citta’della Scenza e della Salute di Torino, Turin, Italy; 3Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy; 4Department
of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah; 5Department of Nuclear Medicine, Leipzig University
Medical Centre, Leipzig, Germany; 6University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona; 7Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 8Atlantic Health System, Morristown, New Jersey, and Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York; 9Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California;
and 10APHM, CNRS, Centrale Marseille, Institut Fresnel, Timone Hospital, CERIMED, Nuclear Medicine Department, Aix Marseille
University, Marseille, France
PREAMBLE
The Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging (SNMMI) is
an international scientiﬁc and professional organization founded in
1954 to promote the science, technology, and practical application of
nuclear medicine. The European Association of Nuclear Medicine
(EANM) is a professional nonproﬁt medical association that facilitates
communication worldwide between individuals pursuing clinical and
research excellence in nuclear medicine. The EANM was founded in
1985. The EANM was founded in 1985. SNMMI and EANM members
are physicians, technologists, and scientists specializing in the research
and practice of nuclear medicine.
The SNMMI and EANM will periodically deﬁne new guidelines for
nuclear medicine practice to help advance the science of nuclear medi-
cine and to improve the quality of service to patients throughout the
world. Existing practice guidelines will be reviewed for revision or
renewal, as appropriate, on their ﬁfth anniversary or sooner, if indicated.
Each practice guideline, representing a policy statement by the
SNMMI/EANM, has undergone a thorough consensus process in
which it has been subjected to extensive review. The SNMMI and
EANM recognize that the safe and effective use of diagnostic nuclear
medicine imaging requires speciﬁc training, skills, and techniques, as
described in each document. Reproduction or modiﬁcation of the
published practice guideline by those entities not providing these ser-
vices is not authorized.
These guidelines are an educational tool designed to assist practi-
tioners in providing appropriate care for patients. They are not inﬂexi-
ble rules or requirements of practice and are not intended, nor should
they be used, to establish a legal standard of care. For these reasons
and those set forth below, both the SNMMI and the EANM caution
against the use of these guidelines in litigation in which the clinical
decisions of a practitioner are called into question.
The ultimate judgment regarding the propriety of any speciﬁc pro-
cedure or course of action must be made by the physician or medical
physicist in light of all the circumstances presented. Thus, there is no
implication that an approach differing from the guidelines, standing
alone, is below the standard of care. To the contrary, a conscientious
practitioner may responsibly adopt a course of action different from
that set forth in the guidelines when, in the reasonable judgment of the
practitioner, such course of action is indicated by the condition of the
patient, limitations of available resources, or advances in knowledge
or technology subsequent to publication of the guidelines.
The practice of medicine includes both the art and the science of
the prevention, diagnosis, alleviation, and treatment of disease. The
variety and complexity of human conditions make it impossible to
always reach the most appropriate diagnosis or to predict with cer-
tainty a particular response to treatment.
Therefore, it should be recognized that adherence to these guide-
lines will not ensure an accurate diagnosis or a successful outcome.
All that should be expected is that the practitioner will follow a rea-
sonable course of action based on current knowledge, available
resources, and the needs of the patient to deliver effective and safe
medical care. The sole purpose of these guidelines is to assist practi-
tioners in achieving this objective.
I. INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this document is to provide nuclear medicine
practitioners in making recommendations, performing, interpret-
ing, and reporting results of PET imaging of the brain using
2-[18F]ﬂuoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose ([18F]FDG).
Nuclear medicine is the medical specialty that uses the tracer
principle, most often with radiopharmaceuticals, to evaluate molec-
ular, metabolic, physiologic, and pathologic conditions of the body
for the purposes of diagnosis, therapy, and research.
The combination of anatomic information from other modalities
may complement the information from tracers, providing more
information than the sum of the two separately.
The present document considers the work of previous procedure
guidelines organizations such as the Society of Nuclear Medicine
Molecular Imaging (SNMMI) Brain Imaging Council [Alan D.
Waxman, MD; Karl Herholz, MD; David H. Lewis, MD; Peter
Herscovitch, MD; Satoshi Minoshima, MD; PhD, Masanori Ichise,
MD; Alexander E. Drzezga, MD; Michael D. Devous, Sr., PhD;
Received Sep. 5, 2024; revision accepted Sep. 5, 2024.
For correspondence or reprints, contact Javier Arbizu (atpacientecun@
unav.es).
Published online Oct. 17, 2024.
Immediate Open Access: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (CC BY) allows users to share and adapt with attribution, excluding
materials credited to previous publications. License: https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/. Details: https://jnm.snmjournals.org/page/permissions.
COPYRIGHT  2024 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging.
DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.124.268754
PROCEDURE STANDARD

Arbizu et al.
1

Journal of Nuclear Medicine, published on October 17, 2024 as doi:10.2967/jnumed.124.268754



---
[PAGE 2/16]

James M. Mountz, MD, PhD] (1) and the European Association of
Nuclear Medicine (EANM) Neuroimaging Committee (2).
These new practice guidelines incorporate advances in PET tech-
nology such as digital PET and hybrid PET/MR systems, dedicated
brain PET systems, advances in individual PET semiquantitative
analysis, and current broadening clinical indications (e.g., for
encephalitis and brain lymphoma). Further insight has also become
available about hyperglycemia effects in patients who undergo
brain [18F]FDG PET. Accordingly, the patient preparation proce-
dure has been updated. Finally, most typical brain patterns of meta-
bolic changes are summarized for neurodegenerative diseases.
The information provided should be taken in the context of local
conditions and regulations.
II. GOALS
The goal of this guideline is to achieve a high-quality standard
of [18F]FDG brain imaging, to further increase the diagnostic
impact of this technique in neurologic, neurosurgical, and psychi-
atric practice.
III. DEFINITIONS
See also the SNMMI Guideline for General Imaging.
In the brain, glucose metabolism provides approximately 95%
of adenosine triphosphate required for brain function. Under phys-
iologic conditions, glucose metabolism is tightly coupled to neuro-
nal activity. [18F]FDG is suitable for imaging regional cerebral
glucose consumption with PET since it accumulates in neuronal
tissue depending on facilitated transport of glucose via glucose
transporters and hexokinase-mediated phosphorylation, as well as
the functional interactions between astrocytes and neurons (3).
Therefore, changes in neuronal activity induced by disease are
reﬂected in an alteration of glucose metabolism. Also, inﬂamma-
tory processes and malignant tumors exhibit increased glucose
metabolism. [18F]FDG PET is currently the most accurate in vivo
method for the investigation of regional human brain glucose
metabolism in health and disease states.
The clinical use of [18F]FDG can be regarded as established for
several diagnostic questions in neurology, neurosurgery, and psy-
chiatry. This information is often complementary to the anatomic
detail provided by structural imaging techniques such as CT or
MRI. However, functional impairment often precedes structural
changes and may also exist alone.
IV. COMMON CLINICAL INDICATIONS
The following clinical indications especially integrate the EANM
and SNMMI recommendations for the use of brain [18F]FDG PET (4).
Common indications for brain PET imaging using [18F]FDG
include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Common Indications
1. Cognitive Impairment and Dementia. In neurodegenerative
disorders such as Alzheimer disease (AD), changes in synaptic activ-
ity occur early in the course of the disease, when macrostructural
brain changes cannot yet be detected. Furthermore, tau pathology was
shown to mirror brain hypometabolism and clinical symptoms (5). In
this line, the hypometabolism signiﬁcantly exceeded atrophy in most
altered brain regions, which is however not the case in the hippocam-
pus, suggesting that for such structures, synaptic compensatory mech-
anisms may be taking place, maintaining neuronal activity in spite of
structural alteration (6), especially in younger patients. Despite its
relatively small dimension, hippocampal hypometabolism is neverthe-
less more evident in late-onset AD (7). Additionally, new categories
for neurodegenerative disorders have been recognized including of
the transactive response DNA binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43)
proteinopathy (LATE), primary age-related tauopathy, and argyro-
philic grain disease, in conjunction with hippocampus sclerosis,
which need to be incorporated into the interpretation of [18F]FDG
PET images (8). The recognition of LATE on [18F]FDG PET is par-
ticularly important as there is currently no imaging biomarker of
TDP-43, and AD and LATE pathologies overlap signiﬁcantly in
elderly patients.
In AD, [18F]FDG PET is viewed as a marker of neurodegeneration
(N) and progression, and currently included—along with hippocam-
pal volume measured with MRI—in the A/T/N, classiﬁcation scheme
with amyloid-b (A) and tau (T) (9,10). A recent study suggests that
[18F]FDG PET is an independent biomarker to predict AD conver-
sion in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) along with
amyloid-b and tau, independent of hippocampal volume (11) and of
amyloid PET status (12,13). In the diagnostic work-up of patients
with suspected AD dementia, the use of [18F]FDG PET is comple-
mentary to A and T biomarkers: amyloid PET and cerebrospinal ﬂuid
(CSF) Ab42 for amyloid biomarkers, and CSF phosphorylated tau
and tau PET for tau biomarkers (14). [18F]FDG PET is recommended
to support early diagnosis of AD in MCI (15), early diagnosis of
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) (in addition to presynaptic dopa-
minergic imaging which usually is more accurate in this indication)
(16), and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) (17). [18F]FDG
PET is also recommended to support the differential diagnosis
between AD and FTLD, between AD and DLB, between FTLD and
DLB, between AD and vascular dementia when clinical and MRI
data are inconclusive, and between differential diagnosis within neu-
rodegenerative parkinsonian syndromes associated with dementia
(15,18–20). In the framework of cognitive impairment work-up, a
recent consensus algorithm has been proposed on suitable indications
of [18F]FDG PET, especially emphasizing its great value as a ﬁrst-
line evaluation when a non-AD disorder is clinically suspected
(14,21). Typical topographic patterns of relative hypometabolism
associated with AD, FTLD, and DLB are summarized in the EANM
procedure guidelines for brain PET imaging using [18F]FDG (2). Pat-
terns of hypometabolism tend to mirror clinical presentations and
might also help to support diagnostic work-up of atypical AD in the
framework of posterior cortical atrophy (22–24) and primary progres-
sive aphasia (25). For sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and positive and nega-
tive predictive value of [18F]FDG PET in this framework, the reader
is referred to the EANM/European Association of Neurology recom-
mendations and to the original publications (4). Beyond the differen-
tial diagnosis with vascular dementia, [18F]FDG PET can also be
used to help distinguish between cognitive impairment of degenera-
tive diseases from nondegenerative origin, such as in traumatic brain
injury (in correlation to MRI using PET/MRI device or fusion (26)),
idiopathic normal-pressure hydrocephalus (showing striatal hypome-
tabolism with preserved cortical metabolism) (27), postacute infection
syndrome (showing limbic/paralimbic, brain stem, and cerebellar
hypometabolisms) (28–31), or depression. For the latter, studies
report mild to moderate cortical resting state relative hypometabolism
in [18F]FDG PET involving the frontal, temporal, insular, and cingu-
late areas, especially including the limbic areas, as well as the basal
ganglia, in relation with the clinical severity and the therapeutic
response (32–34), as well as possible pharmacologic interferences
mostly in group analyses: these possible subtle brain abnormalities
associated with depression at individual level usually do not limit the
2
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE
 Vol. 00
 No. 00
 XXX 2024



---
[PAGE 3/16]

differential diagnosis with neurodegenerative diseases. Interestingly, a
normal [18F]FDG PET scan has a relevant negative predictive value
at the MCI stage, with less than 10% of patients progressing to
degenerative dementia over 3y (35).
2. Movement Disorders and Parkinsonian Syndromes. [18F]FDG
PET can be used for the differential diagnosis between Parkinson
disease (PD) and atypical parkinsonian syndromes such as progres-
sive supranuclear palsy (PSP), multiple system atrophy (MSA), cor-
ticobasal syndrome, and the already mentioned DLB (36,37).
Typical topographic patterns of cortical and subcortical changes in
glucose metabolism of parkinsonian conditions have been described
in neurodegenerative parkinsonism based on qualitative interpreta-
tion and semiquantitative analysis using voxel-based analysis or
principal component analyses with estimation of spatial covariance
patterns (i.e., metabolic connectivity) (38–45). PD patients exhibit
relative hypermetabolism in basal ganglia, motor cortex, and cerebel-
lar vermis and variable hypometabolism in cortical associative areas
(46). However, when PD patients are scanned under dopaminergic
treatment, relative hypermetabolism of cerebellar vermis, basal gan-
glia, and motor cortex might be reduced (47). Cortical relative hypo-
metabolism in temporo-occipital and parietal regions has also been
described in PD MCI or PD patients that develop PD with dementia
at follow-up (38). Interestingly, patients with idiopathic rapid eye
movement sleep behavior disorder, a prodromal stage of PD, DLB,
or MSA, present a brain glucose metabolism pattern partially over-
lapped with the PD-related pattern (48). Moreover, a brain meta-
bolic pattern reﬂecting the risk of phenotypic conversion from
idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder to an overt
a-synucleinopathy has been demonstrated (49).
Unlike PD, atypical parkinsonian conditions exhibit a neurode-
generation of subcortical areas like basal ganglia, mesencephalon,
or cerebellum with a consequent decrease of synaptic activity in
[18F]FDG PET (43,50). Typical topographic patterns of relative
hypo- and hypermetabolism associated with PD, PSP, MSA, and
CBD are summarized in the EANM procedure guidelines for brain
PET imaging using [18F]FDG (2). PSP is the second most frequent
cause of neurodegenerative parkinsonian syndrome after PD or DLB,
and the related pattern is expressed in the Richardson syndrome
variant as well as other less common PSP variants (43). Moreover,
[18F]FDG PET is recommended to support clinical diagnosis of
PSP and included as a prognostic biomarker (51,52).
3. Other Neurodegenerative Motor Diseases. The clinical use
of [18F]FDG PET as biomarker has been also proposed on other
neurodegenerative diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS) and Huntington disease (HD) (53). In ALS, the brain meta-
bolic pattern consists of hypometabolism in the primary, pre-, and
supplementary motor cortices extending to the frontoparietal cortex
and relative hypermetabolism in the cerebellum and brain stem.
Metabolism in the medial temporal cortex can range between hyper-
and hypometabolism depending on whether the patient has associated
frontotemporal dementia. There is a continuum between ALS and
frontotemporal dementia in which 50% of patients have minor cogni-
tive and behavioral changes, whereas 10%–15% have overt fronto-
temporal dementia (54). In the clinical setting, [18F]FDG brain PET
has a prognostic value as patients with frontotemporal hypometabo-
lism have a worse prognosis because of associated frontotemporal
dementia. Although, the metabolic pattern is able to discriminate
patients from controls with an accuracy higher than 90% (55–57), the
diagnostic value is limited as the brain metabolic pattern is similar
between diseases that mimic the symptoms of ALS (ALS-mimics)
and ALS patients (58). In HD, [18F]FDG PET has only limited
clinical value; however, HD patients with atypical (i.e., behavioral/
psychiatric) presentations might be submitted to [18F]FDG PET in
the suspect of other diseases, and the nuclear medicine physician
should be able to recognize a peculiar pattern of hypometabolism
associated with HD. It has been described that the striatal hypometa-
bolism present in HD may identify presymptomatic mutation carriers
who will develop clinical HD (59–63). Besides striatal hypometabo-
lism, HD is associated with a decreased cortical metabolism and an
increased thalamic, occipital, and cerebellar metabolism (60). The
respective hypo- and hypermetabolism gradually increases during dis-
ease progression and aids selection of patients for clinical trials (64).
4. Epilepsy. The common indication is the presurgical evalua-
tion of focal pharmaco-resistant epilepsy in adults and children to
identify the epileptogenic zone using interictal injection (65–70).
With a better spatial resolution, [18F]FDG PET has also higher
sensitivity than interictal perfusion SPECT, especially in temporal
lobe epilepsy (84% vs. 66% in a metaanalysis study) (71). Uncoupling
of blood ﬂow and metabolism is moreover suspected in epilepsy, with
more pronounced cerebral reduction in glucose metabolism than in
perfusion. Of note, the interictal brain PET hypometabolism corre-
sponds with the entire irritative zone (i.e., the epileptogenic zone and
subsequent neural networks involved in the generation of interictal
paroxysms). In this line, extension of hypometabolism to areas beyond
the temporal lobe is often found in patients with focal epilepsy, but
nevertheless with a great correlation to clinical presentations and
stereo-electroencephalogram (EEG) (66,67). Performance is lower in
extratemporal lobe epilepsy with identiﬁcation of the epileptogenic
zone in 38%–67% of cases (65). [18F]FDG PET is of particular inter-
est in suspected focal cortical dysplasia, also in children, and espe-
cially in case of (apparent) negative MRI (67). Correlation to brain
MRI using PET/MR device or image fusion techniques is particularly
important in this framework to identify initially unknown lesions.
Interestingly, clinical outcome of cases with positive PET and nega-
tive MRI is similar to those with positive MRI (72,73). Finally,
[18F]FDG PET has good prognostic value for postsurgical outcome,
especially in case of limited hypometabolism extent (66,74–76), and
provides a prognostic value on cognition with more limited hypometa-
bolism associated with a better postoperative cognitive status (77,78).
5. Encephalitis. Encephalitis includes autoimmune encephalitis
(AE) and paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis and infectious and
postinfectious encephalitis, as well frontier presentations (e.g.,
Morvan syndrome (79)) and differential diagnosis of inﬂammatory
encephalopathies (e.g., neuro-lupus (80); see Appendix of (81) for
the whole spectrum of these disorders). With a higher sensitivity,
[18F]FDG PET is especially relevant in patients with negative or
inconclusive MRI (82–85), both for adults and children (86). A
recent systematic review and metaanalysis conﬁrms a sensitivity of
80%–90% of [18F]FDG PET with a typical pattern associating
global hypometabolism to striatal and limbic relative hypermetabo-
lism (87), with also a speciﬁcity of 82% against MCI (88). Medial
temporal changes have been preferentially associated with autoanti-
bodies against intracellular antigens (89). This metabolic proﬁle is
also used in the follow-up to evaluate therapeutic efﬁcacy, whereas
whole-body PET is performed to identify cancer in paraneoplastic
syndromes or systemic inﬂammatory localizations (90).
6. Neurooncology. Because of the high physiologic uptake of
[18F]FDG in normal brain gray matter and variable uptake by
inﬂammatory lesions, [18F]FDG PET has a more limited impact
than amino-acid PET—when available—in the imaging of gliomas
(91). Better contrast between tumor and normal brain tissue as
well between gray and white matter can be obtained with a longer
PROCEDURE STANDARD

Arbizu et al.
3



---
[PAGE 4/16]

time interval from FDG administration to data acquisition (e.g.,
60 min up to several hours for tumors) (92). A standardized acqui-
sition protocol is nevertheless recommended with a ﬁxed time for
starting the acquisition to improve the comparability from different
patients or repeated scans. [18F]FDG PET can be used in the diag-
nosis of lymphoma, since most primary central nervous system
lymphoma (PCNSL) lesions are highly [18F]FDG-avid, with
homogeneous uptake, and also in the differential diagnosis of non-
malignant lesions in patients with AIDS (and particularly Toxo-
plasma infection) (93). The diagnostic accuracy of pretreatment
brain [18F]FDG PET is high in PCNSL with pooled sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value
higher than 84% (94), with an uptake predictive of the therapeutic
response (95). PET also contributes to the evaluation of whole-
body extension of the lymphoma with less than 5% of false posi-
tives in another recent metaanalysis (96). Interestingly, amino-acid
PET has not demonstrated an additional value over [18F]FDG PET
in PCNSL (97). However, in patients with gliomas, the role of
[18F]FDG PET is limited as discussed in dedicated procedural
guidelines (98). If amino-acid PET is not available, [18F]FDG PET
can be used at diagnosis, with increasing [18F]FDG uptake corre-
lated to higher tumor grade and poorer prognosis (99), despite
overlap between grade I/II and grade III/IV gliomas, with also a
prognostic value on survival at recurrence (100). [18F]FDG PET
may be used to distinguish radiation necrosis from recurrent tumor,
with moderate additional value in comparison to MRI, usually at
least 6 to 8 wk after radiation therapy, with a pooled sensitivity and
speciﬁcity of 84% on a recent metaanalysis (91,98,101,102) for gli-
omas and for brain metastases with reported sensitivities and speci-
ﬁcities ranging from 50% to nearly 100% (103).
B. Relative Contraindications and Limitations
There is no signiﬁcant contraindication associated with intrave-
nous injection of [18F]FDG, but cautions should be paid to the fol-
lowing conditions.
1. Patient Safety. In the case of PET/MRI, patient safety informa-
tion concerning magnetic ﬁeld should be carefully screened before
MRI (including the presence of devices potentially not compatible,
such as pacemakers, neurostimulators, cochlear implants, non–
MRI-compatible metal implants, pumps, etc.; in case of doubt for
ocular metal pieces, a low dose x-ray can be performed).
2. Pregnancy. For any diagnostic procedure in a woman patient
known or suspected to be pregnant, a critical decision is necessary
to assess whether the beneﬁts weigh against the possible harm.
3. Breast Feeding. Women should interrupt breast feeding at
least for the ﬁrst hours after a scan per the guidance of the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission Advisory Committee on the Medical Use
of Isotopes (ACMUI) in the United States, although in many Euro-
pean countries, 24 h is recommended.
4. Lack of Cooperation or Inability to Tolerate. Claustrophobia
and, most importantly, obesity can also be an obvious limitation,
especially for PET/MR.
5. Uncontrollable Hyperglycemia. Hyperglycemia can be a
limitation because of the inadequate statistical image quality and
gray-matter to white-matter contrast.
V. QUALIFICATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONNEL
A. Physician
All nuclear medicine examinations should be performed under
the supervision of and interpreted by a physician certiﬁed in
nuclear medicine or nuclear radiology by the American Board of
Nuclear Medicine or the national equivalent. The physician should
maintain their certiﬁcation in the ﬁeld of nuclear medicine.
B. Medical Physicist
The medical physicist should be able to practice independently
one or more of the subﬁelds of medical physics. National Regula-
tories and SNMMI consider certiﬁcation (by the American Board
of Science in Nuclear Medicine or by the American Board of
Radiology, or the equivalent) and continuing education in the
appropriate subﬁeld(s) to demonstrate an individual is competent.
C. Technologist
All nuclear medicine examinations should be performed by a
nuclear medicine technologist that is registered and certiﬁed in
nuclear medicine by the Nuclear Medicine Technology Certiﬁca-
tion Board or national equivalent. The nuclear medicine technolo-
gist works under the supervision of the physician.
VI. PROCEDURE/SPECIFICATIONS OF THE EXAMINATION
See also the SNMMI Guideline for General Imaging.
A. Nuclear Medicine Study Request
1. Information Relevant for the Procedure.
a. History of diseases, especially neurologic and psychiatric
disorders, and current neurologic and psychiatric status
including clinical test results, surgery, radiation, or trauma
of the brain.
b. History of diabetes and knowledge of patient’s fasting
state.
c. Patients’ ability to lie still for 15 min to 1 h. If sedation is
required, it should be performed as late as possible. The
intention should be to administer [18F]FDG at least 30 to
40 min before the sedation.
d. Information about recent structural imaging studies (CT,
MRI), prior PET (FDG, amyloid, or tau imaging), or SPECT
brain images, ﬂuid biomarkers (CSF, plasma), blood bio-
chemistry indicative of metabolic dysfunction or systemic
disease (e.g., hepatic, thyroid, renal), as well as about func-
tional brain explorations (EEG, neuropsychology) in speci-
ﬁc conditions.
e. Ongoing necessary therapies are allowed but current medi-
cations (and timing of their last administration) must be
recorded. This information (including duration and dos-
age) is particularly relevant for sedatives, psychotropic
pharmaceuticals, antiseizure medication, and corticoster-
oids. Possible effects of these medications on regional
metabolic rate of glucose consumption (rCMRglc) have
been suggested (104–106), but such effects on diagnostic
accuracy of [18F]FDG PET have not been addressed
systematically.
Use and dosage of corticosteroids might be particularly relevant
for emerging indications of brain [18F]FDG PET such as AE and
PCNSL. In whole-body [18F]FDG PET, possible false-negative
results are well known for inﬂammatory and autoimmune diseases
treated with corticosteroids (107,108). For brain [18F]FDG PET,
and whenever clinically possible, it is also advised to scan patients
before starting (or in any case as soon as possible after initiating)
steroid treatment in case of both AE and PCNSL.
Regarding discontinuation of abuse drugs, it should be noted
that reports are also available about the effects of early abstinence
on regional brain metabolism. For example, a shift in cortical–
subcortical metabolic balance has been reported during early
4
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE
 Vol. 00
 No. 00
 XXX 2024



---
[PAGE 5/16]

abstinence from chronic methamphetamine abuse (109). Similarly,
it has been shown that acute alcohol administration may decrease
brain glucose utilization that may persist through early sobriety in
heavy drinkers (110).
Finally, in the case of parkinsonian patients, the treatment with
levodopa might reduce glucose metabolism regionally and conse-
quently modify the deﬁned patterns described in these patients.
Therefore, treatments should be recorded whether the examination
is conducted in clinically deﬁned “off” or “on” state (47).
B. Patient Preparation and Precautions
1. Prearrival.
a. Patient should be fasting for 4–6 h.
b. Oral hydration with water is encouraged.
c. Avoid caffeine, alcohol, or drugs that may affect cerebral
glucose metabolism.
d. Required medications should be taken with water.
e. Intravenous ﬂuid containing dextrose or parenteral feeding
should be withheld for 4–6 h.
f. Pregnancy is a relative contraindication especially during
the ﬁrst trimester.
g. Refrain from breast feeding for hours per the Nuclear Regu-
latory Commission ACMUI guidance in the United States,
although in many European countries, 24 h is recommended
(2,111).
See the Society of Nuclear Medicine procedure Guidelines for
general imaging.
2. Preinjection.
a. Environment
The environment should be stable before FDG injection
and during the subsequent uptake phase.
(1) The patient should be placed in a quiet, dimly lit
room.
(2) Minor background noise is acceptable, and patients
should be awake with eyes open. Closing the eyes
could decrease metabolism in the occipital cortex, a
cortical region that might be relevant for speciﬁc
clinical conditions (as in DLB, characterized by
hypometabolism of the occipital cortex) (112). In
any case, a consistent procedure is required in each
center to maintain comparability between examina-
tions (eyes open/closed), also with respect to the
normal control database if semiquantitative analy-
ses based on voxels or regions/volumes of interest
is performed.
(3) The patient should be seated or reclined comfortably.
(5) Place intravenous access at least 10 min before
injection to permit accommodation.
(6) Instruct the patient to relax, not to speak or read
and to avoid major movements.
(7) Minimize interaction with the patient during at least
30 min after injection.
b. Blood Glucose Levels
Blood glucose levels should be checked before [18F]FDG
administration. Hyperglycemia (.110 mg/dL) gradually
reduces brain [18F]FDG uptake due to the increased com-
petition of this radiotracer with endogenous glucose for
transport by glucose transporters and for phosphorylation
by hexokinase (113,114). As a general rule, there is a
decrease in [18F]FDG inﬂux rate constant (K1) quantitatively
paralleling blood glucose concentrations, resulting in dete-
rioration of image quality with increasing glucose concen-
trations. Decreased contrast between white-matter and
gray-matter uptake can be found, which might, at least in
theory, impact diagnostic accuracy (115,116), but the exact
relationship between the degree of hyperglycemia and
diagnostic accuracy of [18F]FDG PET has not been
addressed systematically. In recent years, some reports
have suggested that hyperglycemia might enhance hypo-
metabolism
in
the
posterior
parieto-occipital
cortex
(113,117). These regions encompass the typical AD hypo-
metabolic pattern. Therefore, concerns have been raised
about the impact of hyperglycemia on the accuracy of PET
in patients with suspected AD (118). Very few studies
directly addressed this issue, however, and, to date, a mea-
surable effect on scan interpretation has not been proven
(113,119). In any case, an examination should be post-
poned until an acceptable euglycemic state is reached.
Notably, acute correction of hyperglycemia with insulin
usually does not substantially improve brain image quality,
probably because the normalization of an increased intracel-
lular glucose level lags behind the normalization of the
plasma glucose level (120). Quantitation of regional cerebral
glucose metabolism with [18F]FDG PET also requires
steady-state situations which are not maintained during falling
plasma glucose levels after administration of insulin. Best
results for clinical brain [18F]FDG PET imaging in diabetics
can be obtained in an euglycemic condition during correct
therapeutic management (115,120,121), but diagnostically
acceptable [18F]FDG PET can be obtained at a plasma glu-
cose level of 160–180mg/dL. The use of other molecular
imaging modalities can be considered in patients with uncon-
trolled diabetes (i.e., amyloid PET imaging in the suspect of
AD or perfusion SPECT when appropriate for other clinical
scenarios) (118,119).
Interestingly, it has been suggested that hyperglycemia
obtained by intravenous infusion of 10% glucose solution
could enhance detectability in patients with brain tumors
(112). Procedural guidelines for PET imaging in glioma
should be considered for further details (98).
c. Urinary Bladder
Before the scanning procedure, patients should void their
urinary bladder for maximum comfort during the study
and to reduce radiation exposure. Advising the patient to
drink water and void the bladder again after the scanning
session is also recommended to minimize radiation exposure.
d. Epilepy Evaluation
For presurgical evaluation of epilepsy (70), close monitor-
ing of the patient is required. Such monitoring should start
before injection, as soon as the patient arrives in the
department, in order to ensure that [18F]FDG is not
administered in an ictal/postictal stage. MR images
acquired in combination with PET or before it, as well as
a well-documented history of seizures before imaging are
of critical importance for adequate image interpretation.
3. Precautions and Conscious Sedation.
a. Supervision
Continuous supervision of patients during the whole scan-
ning procedure is required. This is particularly important
for patients with epilepsy and cognitive impairment.
PROCEDURE STANDARD

Arbizu et al.
5



---
[PAGE 6/16]

b. Sedation
In patients with limited ability to cooperate (e.g., due to
their cognitive/behavioral disorders) and in whom no con-
traindications against medical sedation exist, it may be
useful to apply conscious sedation (e.g., by a short acting
benzodiazepine such as intravenous midazolam). Admin-
istration should take place at least 30 to 40 min after tracer
injection, preferably starting only a few minutes before
data acquisition. Sedation should be used with caution and
rather be avoided if dynamic acquisitions are performed
for quantiﬁcation of rCMRglc, because of effects of the
sedative on glucose metabolism and thus also on brain
uptake of [18F]FDG. Appropriate monitoring (pulse-oxim-
etry) should be performed to prevent cardiopulmonary
depression, and appropriate antidote/emergency backup
should be foreseen. The dose of sedation should be
reduced in elderly patients. National regulations in terms
of the inﬂuence of medical sedation on ﬁtness to drive
need to be considered.
C. Radiopharmaceuticals: [18F]FDG
See the SNMMI and EANM Procedure Guideline for Use of
Radiopharmaceuticals
1. Recommended Activity for Adults. Previous guidelines men-
tioned 125–740 MBq (typically 150 MBq) when scans are per-
formed in 3D-mode (122). However, it is important to note that
scanner sensitivities vary across systems, and the duration of
image acquisition also affects the image quality and the dose
needed to achieve optimal image quality. For high sensitivity digi-
tal systems (TOF , 400ps) or large axial ﬁeld of view (also called
total body) systems, activity might be lowered, probably by a fac-
tor of 2 or more, but limited data are at present available to give
clear recommendations.
2. Recommended Activity for Children. Activity administered
in MBq 5 14 3 multiple (dosage card). Administered activities to
children may also be lower in case of high sensitivity digital sys-
tems or total-body PET systems, but should not exceed those
recommended in the EANM dosage card v.01.02.2014 (123).
For the USA, the previous guidelines for children mentioned
1.85 to 3.7 MBq/kg, with a minimum of 14 MBq and a maximum
of 148 MBq (124).
D. Protocol/Image Acquisition
1. Instrumentation. PET/CT and PET/MR systems that acquire
images in list-mode and in 3D are preferred. In addition, new
PET/CT and PET/MR systems show increased sensitivity because
of increased axial ﬁeld of views, silicon photomultipliers (“digital
PET”) or use of time-of-ﬂight technology (125–130). These prop-
erties can be beneﬁcial in those cases where the injected radioac-
tivity or the acquisition time need to be reduced (e.g., pediatric
cases or patients with limited ability to cooperate). More recently,
dedicated brain PET scanners have been also proposed to reduce
costs and installation constraints on full-time cerebral imaging
activities, and large axial ﬁeld of view (LAFOV) PET/CT scanners
offer the possibility of whole-body dynamic imaging, which
improves compartment modeling.
2. Positioning of the Patient. Careful positioning of the patient’s
head is critical, especially for cameras with limited axial ﬁeld of
view. The orbitomeatal line is often used for standardized posi-
tioning, and the patients head can be ﬁxed in place. To prevent
movement artifacts, the patient should be instructed to avoid any
movements of the head.
3. Type of Acquisition. Depending on the clinical question and
type of equipment, [18F]FDG PET imaging may include:
a. Static Acquisition
A single set of tomographic images is obtained after brain
uptake. The static image should usually start at a ﬁxed
postinjection time, generally 30 to 40 min after injection
for evaluating neuronal activity for the diagnosis of neuro-
logic diseases, and 60 min after injection or delayed (dual-
time-point) scanning can be also considered for neuroon-
cological
diagnostic
purposes
(92,98).
Preferably,
a
dynamic reconstruction in several frames (1-to-5-min
frames depending on the total scan time) should be per-
formed to check potential movement artifacts in addition
to the static reconstruction. Images should be evaluated by
means of visual assessment, complemented by semiquan-
titative or voxel-based analysis.
b. Dynamic Acquisition
Multiple sequential sets of tomographic images are acquired
from the time of administration of [18F]FDG and up to 60min
after tinjection. This acquisition is especially used in clinical
settings to correct patient’s movements when absolute quantiﬁ-
cation of rCMRglc is required generally for research purposes
(see paragraph on absolute quantiﬁcation in G.2.) and perform
parametric analysis or functional activation studies.
4. Attenuation Correction. This correction is mandatory for
[18F]FDG PET brain imaging and is currently performed using CT- or
MR-based attenuation correction or using mathematically estimated
attenuation maps. Possible motion artifacts between PET and CT
acquisitions have to be systematically checked.
a. CT-Based Attenuation Correction
PET/CT systems can use the CT scan for attenuation cor-
rection and anatomic correlation. The advantage of a CT
scan is that x-rays detection is not impacted by emission
photons. Consequently, a CT scan can be performed after
the radiopharmaceutical injection. A CT scan can be
done for diagnostic purposes, using regular tube current,
or just for attenuation correction (i.e., a low-dose CT)
with low tube current (typically 10–30 mAs). The latter
has the advantage to signiﬁcantly reduce the CT-related
radiation exposure well below 0.5 mSv for most sys-
tems. The choice of either type of CT scans depends on
the purpose of imaging and the clinical indication. If ana-
tomic information is already available, a low-dose CT for
the purpose of attenuation correction can be considered.
When performing PET/CT, it is recommended to check for
movement between CT and the PET acquisitions, to avoid
artifacts in the attenuation correction.
b. MR-Based Attenuation Correction (131)
For hybrid PET/MR systems, attenuation corrections (AC)
need to be derived using either a dedicated MR sequence
(MR-AC) or use of CT templates depending on the sys-
tem’s available methods. In most of the systems only
MR-AC or CT templates are commercially available now,
but improved and more advanced methods using special
image reconstruction algorithms and artiﬁcial intelligence
(132–136) are expected to be offered in future software
updates. For MR-AC imaging, the body coil or a dedicated
brain/head coil may be required. However, the best perform-
ing MR-AC methods work accurately for [18F]FDG brain
PET imaging (137).
6
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE
 Vol. 00
 No. 00
 XXX 2024



---
[PAGE 7/16]

In all cases, it is recommended to visually control the gener-
ated attenuation correction maps for unforeseen artifacts aris-
ing from metal or dental implants, missing air cavities and
missing bones, particularly in MR AC (138). The reader
should be aware of the possible qualitative and quantitative
consequences of these artifacts and take them into consider-
ation when reading or interpreting the PET images. For
example, tracer uptake in cortical brain regions may be
underestimated by about 20%, whereas uptake in pons or
cerebellum may show upward bias in case air cavities are
not correctly considered by the MR-AC. Use of CT tem-
plates can overcome these limitations but may also be less
accurate in case of abnormal bone anatomy, that is, the tem-
plates assume healthy anatomic bone structures (absence of
trauma). The latter can be overcome by separately making
individual CT scans and inserting these into the PET/MR
reconstruction pipeline for attenuation correction purposes.
At present, such a procedure is not routinely available and
formally approved on PET/MR systems. With the recent
introduction of advanced MR-AC methods, accurate AC can
be achieved for brain PET images on PET/MRI hybrid sys-
tems (137). However, especially in case of pooling PET data
collected on PET/CT and PET/MR systems, caution is
advised with regard to the quality of the MR-AC data.
c. Mathematically Estimated Attenuation Map
Especially for the new emerging brain-dedicated PET sys-
tems which do not acquire attenuation CT data, mathematic
estimation of attenuation maps might be applied, like the
Chang method which applies a linear attenuation coefﬁcient
(139) as provided by the manufacturer for clinical use.
5. Emission Scan Acquisition. As already noted, in case of a
static image acquisition procedure, the acquisition should not start
earlier than 30 min after injection. Better contrast between gray
and white matter, as well between tumors and normal brain tissue,
can be obtained with a longer time interval between [18F]FDG
administration and data acquisition (e.g., 60 min up to several
hours for tumors). A standardized acquisition protocol with a ﬁxed
time for acquisition start, generally between 30–40min (for neurologic
diagnostic purposes) and 60min after injection (for neurooncological
diagnostic purposes), is recommended to improve comparability
between examinations of different patients, follow-up scans, or dif-
ferent centers (e.g., as in multicenter trials). Standard protocols on
modern hybrid PET/CT or PET/MR system includes list mode acqui-
sition in 3D mode. The duration of emission image acquisition should
be related to the minimum required number of detected events. Typi-
cally, data are acquired over 10–15min, possibly less depending on
the [18F]FDG dose activity administrated. A whole-body PET/CT
scan is particularly recommended in case of suspected paraneoplas-
tic syndromes, lymphoma, or autoimmune/inﬂammatory systemic
diseases also involving the brain (e.g., neurosarcoidosis). In special
circumstances, when moderately agitated patients are examined,
acquisition times down to 5 min can be used (140).
In the case of a dynamic procedure, typically a 40 to 60-min 3D
dynamic scan depending on the indication is acquired in list-mode
shortly before (10 s) or simultaneously with the administration of
[18F]FDG. During the PET acquisition, it is required to monitor
head movement and to correct for any displacements. Use of a
dedicated head holder or immobilization device to avoid or limit
head movements is recommended. When available, a motion
tracking system may be used to detect motion to retrospectively
correct for any head displacements. It is beyond these guidelines
to recommend motion correction methods as these are not widely
available or generally accepted. Yet, the reader should be aware
that it is important to avoid or correct for patient motion in case of
long dynamic PET brain studies. After completion of the dynamic
scan, the list-mode data can be binned (and reconstructed) into for
example, 20 to 30 successive time frames to capture kinetics in brain
tissue over time. Typically, time frames are short (5 to 30 s) on
the ﬁrst 5 min of the scan in which the tracer distribution changes
rapidly over time, progressively increasing to about 300 s time
frames at later uptake times.
6. Interventions. Usually, interventions are not necessary to
answer routine clinical questions; they are mostly used in research.
In the localization of eloquent cortical areas before surgery, stimu-
lation paradigms like language or motor tasks can be performed.
Currently, such activation imaging is mostly performed with func-
tional MRI (fMRI). If performed with [18F]FDG PET to image spe-
cial clinical states, especially for MRI contraindications (141–144),
these paradigms usually start at the time of injection and have to
be maintained for a time period of at least 30 min (145,146).
Improvement of temporal resolution of PET imaging has also
been proposed using continuous infusion of FDG for intervention
studies (147).
E. Image Processing
Preferably, images are reconstructed using (ordered subset) itera-
tive reconstruction including use of time of ﬂight (TOF) information,
when available. Current PET scanners allow matrix sizes as high as
4003 400, but it should be at least 1283 128 pixels. Using a mini-
mum zoom factor of 2 and the recommended matrix size, the voxel
size would be smaller than 2 mm. The number of iterations and sub-
sets applied should be adapted to the manufacturer recommendations
because it depends on the speciﬁc PET system and TOF perfor-
mance. Resolution modeling of point spread function (PSF) is also
part of a new feature in reconstruction software on many available
PET/CT and PET/MR systems. This resolution modeling may be
applied to enhance detection of small abnormalities, but it is not yet
recommended for either visual or quantitative evaluation due to pro-
nounced Gibbs artifacts resulting of overestimation of small structure
uptake with misinterpretation on activity normalization (148,149).
Different initiatives have emerged during the last years in the US as
an effort to standardize brain PET parameters (for instance, ADNI
and SCAN ADRC) (150,151). Recently, the EANM Research
GmbH (EARL) stablished as limits of acceptability an observed
effective resolution of 5 to 6.5mm FWHM (152,153). Depending on
the PET system used, a ﬁnal image resolution of 4–6mm full width at
half maximum (FWHM) typically yields images of adequate resolu-
tion and noise. If movement artifacts are observed, it can be helpful to
reconstruct the data in short frames (e.g., 5-min frames) and evaluate
only those frames that are not affected by patient motion or spatially
align the individual frames before further analysis. It should be noted
that nonattenuated series (that should be reconstructed and archived)
could be useful in this setting to check for artifacts and for reporting.
F. Data Display
 Color scales typically used for the display of the images are
spectrum or rainbow scales (154), or gray scales with contin-
uous progression from low to high uptake.
 A standardized image display, also in terms of upper/lower
color scale thresholding, is advocated to ensure appropriate and
best interpretable representation of the reconstructed dataset.
PROCEDURE STANDARD

Arbizu et al.
7



---
[PAGE 8/16]

 Internal landmarks can be used for reorientation to achieve a
standardized image display. Current software provided by
PET manufactures allows an automatic reorientation proce-
dure based on the intercommissural line. A proper reorientation
on the coronal view is crucial for visual inspection of the scan.
This is as the presence of asymmetry between homologous
structures in the 2 hemispheres is one of the cornerstones of
visual reading. For a more accurate inspection of the medial
temporal lobe, a second reorientation can be made along the
hippocampal axis (the so-called Ohnishi reorientation in which
a patients’ brain is reoriented 30 upward with respect to the
bicommissural line on sagittal view (155), for example for tem-
poral epilepsy or AD.
 The display of additional coronal and sagittal images is
recommended.
 Three-dimensional display of the dataset can be helpful for more
accurate topographic orientation in some clinical questions.
G. Quantification
1. Semiquantitative Procedures. Available tools for automated
assessment and semiquantiﬁcation, currently provided by PET
manufacturers and other vendors, are used in the clinical settings
to improve diagnostic performance of readers (15).
Tools for semiquantiﬁcation and voxel-analysis provide individ-
ual statistical maps (parametric or z score maps) aimed to support
visual reading and to improve anatomic localization of regions of
abnormal metabolism. The user should consider that outputs and
parametric maps generated by this software need to be cross evalu-
ated against the visual evaluation results of the native PET images.
a. Operational Requirement
 Normal database for individual comparison
Semiquantiﬁcation of brain [18F]FDG PET either relying
on a ROI-based or voxelwise statistical evaluation generally
requires comparison between an individual patient’s PET
image and age-matched databases of PET images obtained
from healthy subjects. Commercial packages incorporate
their own healthy subject database although in some cases,
only limited details are available about the composition/
characteristics of this control group. If the software used
does not include an embedded normal controls database,
the control group must be built locally in each center. This
might be challenging and result in suboptimal control
groups also from a clinical point of view (lack of follow-up
of the controls; simple inclusion of normal scans rather than
scans of healthy controls; controls recruited among patients
who undergo [18F]FDG PET for other indications). Finally,
in recent years large databases of normal controls have
been publicly shared in the framework of research projects
and initiatives (156,157). The availability of these databases
might contribute to a further spread of the use of semiquan-
titative tools also in a clinical setting; however, preparation,
acquisition and reconstruction parameters should be harmo-
nized as much as possible with all parameters used to
acquire the normal subject database to reduce the risk of
generating bias and inconsistencies.
 Partial-volume effect correction (PVC)
Given the spatial resolution of PET and the size of the
brain structures that need to be inspected, partial-volume
effect may degrade “quantitative” accuracy of PET images
(158,159). Because of partial volume/spill-over effect, the
intensity of a particular voxel not only reﬂects the tracer
concentration of that voxel, but also that of the surrounding
area. However, only some software packages for auto-
mated analysis of [18F]FDG PET include PVC. The
partial-volume effect is a potential confounding factor in
PET imaging studies, mainly in cases of neurodegenerative
diseases in which it otherwise is unclear whether any
observed decrease in the PET signal is caused by atrophy.
This potential confounding effect should be taken into con-
sideration for the ﬁnal interpretation of the scan, as atrophy
may also be the result of other (nonneurodegenerative)
pathophysiologic mechanisms (aging, chronic ischemia,
postencephalitis brain damage, etc.).
PVC can at best be applied in case of concomitant or prior
acquisition of 3D T1-weighted MR scans. However, at
present there is no consensus on which PVC method
should be used or recommended. Various methods exist
with speciﬁc performances. It is also of utmost importance
that MR data used during the PET analysis pipeline, either
for volume of interest deﬁnitions or PVC are of sufﬁcient
quality and acquired with 1 3 1x1 mm voxels (or better).
It is recommended to correct partial-volume effect by the
same MR scan and the same sequence to maintain repro-
ducibility between examinations. Of note, MR-free PVC
corrections methods are available and can be considered as
well, when MR data are not available or when harmonized
MR image quality cannot be achieved (152).
 Intensity normalization
Intensity normalization (or scaling) is needed to allow
comparing different PET scans or a PET scan against a
normal database (160). Accordingly, scaling can be per-
formed by normalizing to the whole brain (proportional or
global mean scaling), to predeﬁned reference regions
known to be spared in speciﬁc clinical settings (i.e., cere-
bellum, brain stem, pons, primary sensorimotor cortex or
gray matter) or on a data-driven basis (161–165). The
notion of ‘intensity normalization’ is equivalent to SUVR
(Standardized Uptake Value Ratio) used for other molecu-
lar brain imaging such as amyloid PET. The underlying
assumption is that the reference region used is unaffected by
disease or method (e.g., MR-AC, point spread function cor-
rection), which needs to be carefully assessed. Intensity nor-
malization is particularly critical when evaluating patients
who might show both regions of hypermetabolism and
hypometabolism such as patients with AE (166). When
using software for brain [18F]FDG PET semiquantiﬁcation,
it is mandatory to consider the count rate normalization
approach used. In routine clinical practice, it could be help-
ful to use whole brain, pons, and cerebellum for normaliza-
tion, and to carefully compare each semiquantiﬁcation
output with the visual reading result.
b. Voxel-Based Analytic Approaches
In this type of analysis, the minimum unit into which the
image is divided is the voxel. Depending on whether the
voxel is analyzed as an independent unit (univariate) or
the set of voxels and the relationships between them are
analyzed these procedures can be classiﬁed as univariate
or multivariate.
 Univariate image analysis
Univariate models have the particularity that they ana-
lyze each voxel or volume of interest (VOI) of the image
independently, which allows differences to be established
8
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE
 Vol. 00
 No. 00
 XXX 2024



---
[PAGE 9/16]

between groups or individuals in terms of metabolic activ-
ity in each voxel.
Different commercial and free-access software are currently
extensively used to determine abnormalities of regional
[18F]FDG uptake in an observer independent way and to
improve diagnostic accuracy in several clinical settings
(69,167,168). Here, the following tools are most often used:
 3D-SSP (NEUROSTAT) provides a stereotactic sur-
face projection displays. This tool was speciﬁcally
designed for single-subjects analysis and includes a
group of controls (as well as the possibility to replace
this built-in group with a database of local controls).
It displays results using different reference regions
for normalization (whole brain, pons, thalami, and
cerebellum) allowing the user to appreciate the effect
of the different reference regions on the ﬁnal results
(see above). This algorithm has been used exten-
sively for research and also implemented on commer-
cial workstations.
 SPM was originally designed for voxel-based group
comparisons. However, in more recent years, several
studies have validated its use for single-subject analy-
sis which can be implemented to support visual read-
ing (65). A dementia-customized [18F]FDG PET
template has been made available in recent years
including a balanced proportion of [18F]FDG PET
images from control subjects and patients (4). The lack
of a normal control group embedded within the tool is
a potential limitation for its use in a clinical setting
(see above). Finally, there is still lack of standardiza-
tion for SPM processing steps even though these steps
can introduce bias and, more generally, can affect ﬁnal
results (this issue is particularly relevant when choos-
ing a reference region instead of using global count
density for intensity normalization; see above).
 Multivariate image analysis
It is increasingly recognized that neurodegenerative diseases
are characterized by stereotyped connectivity changes, and
that studying networks provides more insight in pathophysio-
logic mechanisms than separate regions. Against univariate
approaches, multivariable models study all the voxels at
once, which allows the relationship between them to be
studied. Those voxels that present a correlation or variance
of their parallel metabolic activity are considered to belong
to the same metabolic neural network, so it is assumed that
these techniques assess brain metabolic connectivity.
Covariance analysis techniques are considered appropriate
methods to explore interrelated brain regions based on the
glucose metabolism (neuronal networks) (169). Such an
approach is the Scaled Subproﬁle Model and Principal
Component Analysis (SSM PCA). With this method,
disease-related patterns (also referred to as metabolic con-
nectivity networks) have been identiﬁed in several neurode-
generative diseases (40–42,44,45,47,59,169,170). Disease-
related patterns identiﬁed by SSM PCA not only delineate the
changes in neuronal metabolism related to the disease, but
can also be used to quantify the degree of pattern expression
in an individual subject (40–42,44,45,47,59,169,170).
c. SUV and Ratios
For
brain
tumor
imaging
typically
semiquantitative
estimates of glucose metabolism like SUV relative to a
normal brain region usually in oncology to the contralat-
eral metabolic uptake (SUVR) are used. For such quantiﬁ-
cation, standardized acquisition times are required. The
total activity of administered [18F]FDG and the patient’s
height and weight for the estimation of body surface are
also required. A calibration factor can also be applied as
well as for comparative studies between different PET cam-
eras. A static image is sufﬁcient, acquired typically at
60 min. These semiquantitative estimates can be corrected
for blood glucose concentration.
2. Absolute Quantification. The quantitative assessment of cere-
bral [18F]FDG/glucose metabolism requires, besides a dynamic emis-
sion scan, an arterial input function, that is, the measurement of
plasma [18F]FDG (over time) and glucose concentrations. There is
a need for a calibration factor between scanner events in terms of
detected events/voxel/s and in vitro (or online) measurements of
plasma activity concentrations in counts/mL/s (171).
Although dynamic image acquisition from the start of injection
up to 60 min after injection is considered to be the most accurate
procedure, most centers use simpliﬁed protocols based on static
images in the clinical setting (172–174).
At this respect it is worthy to comment that image-derived input
function from recently developed highly sensitive LAFOV PET/CT
scanners can avoid the need of invasive blood sampling for kinetic
modeling of [18F]FDG (175).
Glucose metabolism may be derived with either a Patlak plot or a
pharmacokinetic model using the dynamic PET series and the arterial
input function. The primary outcome parameter, the net inﬂux rate
constant Ki then needs to be multiplied with plasma glucose levels to
derive the rCMRglc which also take into account the lumped con-
stant. It is required to measure blood glucose levels during the scan,
or directly before or after the dynamic PET examination.
Estimation of the rCMRglc can be performed by compartmental
modeling or using graphical analytic approaches. The quantiﬁca-
tion can be performed at both region of interest (ROI) or voxel
level. In the ROI-based approach, rCMRglc is estimated in differ-
ent brain regions by ﬁtting the time–activity curve data using the
measured arterial curve as input function. In the voxel-based
approach, parametric images of rCMRglc can be calculated using
Patlak analysis, graphical approach, or a basis function approach.
A correction factor, the so-called “lumped constant” (LC) (176),
can be used to convert [18F]FDG “metabolism” values to values
reﬂecting glucose metabolism (173,177). The lumped constant
might vary in pathologic conditions. For instance, in malignant gli-
oma, a higher LC than the one measured in normal brain has been
reported (178). Under special physiologic conditions, such as pro-
longed or extreme fasting, a reduction of glucose metabolism has
been observed (179). For instance, in one PET study conducted in
obese patients before and after 3 wk of fasting, a 50% decrease of
rCMRglc was reported, with a 25% decrease of the LC (180).
H. Interpretation
1. Visual Analysis.
 The images should be critically examined during interpre-
tation for presence of movement or attenuation artifacts.
 Variation in color scale, background subtraction or change
in contrast can be used to facilitate data interpretation.
 Data interpretation should take into consideration global
changes, such as relative cortical hypometabolism and
regional decreases or increases in [18F]FDG uptake. Increased
uptake can be observed in continue active epileptogenic foci,
PROCEDURE STANDARD

Arbizu et al.
9



---
[PAGE 10/16]

tumors, inﬂammation, and pathophysiologically activated
brain areas.
 Known morphologic changes like cortical sulci and ven-
tricles enlargement should be considered for the full
interpretation of the data. It is helpful to fuse [18F]FDG
images with a CT or MRI scan of the individual per-
formed at the same time (PET/CT, PET/MRI) or inde-
pendently in temporal proximity to the PET scan.
 Presence of localized abnormalities with hypometabolism
or hypermetabolism that can be related to for example,
neuroinﬂammation, structural damage, atrophy, cerebro-
vascular lesions, and pathophysiologic circumstances.
 Accurate evaluation of brain tumors and identiﬁcation
of the metabolically most active part of a brain tumor
before biopsy.
 Matching of cortical hypometabolism with morphologic
abnormalities on MRI or with the EEG focus for plan-
ning of epilepsy surgery.
 Localization of eloquent cortical areas (e.g., motor,
visual, auditive and language) before tumor resection.
Thorough knowledge of the normal physiologic tracer distribu-
tion and the variants and pitfalls that can occur during image
acquisition, processing and interpretation is mandatory in order to
provide optimal diagnostic information to referring physicians and
patients (181).
2. Assisted Visual Analysis. Several studies have investigated
the added value of voxel-based analysis (see above) tools in the clini-
cal setting, and showed higher speciﬁcity compared with visual read-
ing, especially (but not only) for the identiﬁcation of AD-related
patterns, thereby increasing diagnostic conﬁdence (182–186). On the
other hand, sensitivity of visual and automatic analyses has been
shown to be relatively similar although visual analysis obviously is
affected by the experience of the reader (15). Indeed training and
experience in the clinical settings are needed to report brain [18F]FDG
PET especially given the possibility of subtle defects, as they
sometimes occur in the early stages of neurodegenerative disease
(15). Supporting visual analysis with automated observer-independent
approaches is especially suggested for less-skilled readers and, more
in general, with the aim to reduce interreader variability (187).
It is suitable to have a normal database available, preferably
studied on the same type of camera, under the same acquisition
circumstances (e.g., eyes open/closed) and using the same type of
reconstruction and attenuation correction. Matching spatial resolu-
tion is an important parameter needed for optimal database use.
This allows assessment of normal variability of regional [18F]FDG
uptake and improves diagnostic accuracy.
Semiquantitative/voxel-based approaches to [18F]FDG PET anal-
ysis should always be used in conjunction with visual reading (con-
sidering visual reading as the ﬁrst step for images evaluation and
mandatory for quality control). Freeware and commercial software
are available allowing for semiquantiﬁcation or voxel-based analy-
sis based on different methods (18,168,188–190).
VII. DOCUMENTATION AND REPORTING
A. Goals of a Nuclear Medicine Report
1. Provide the referring physician with a timely answer to the
clinical question within the limits of the test
2. Document the appropriateness, necessity, and performance
of the procedure
3. Expedite and assure correct billing
B. Direct Communication
See also ACR Practice Guideline for Communication: Diagnos-
tic Radiology
1. Findings likely to have a signiﬁcant, immediate inﬂuence on
patient care should be communicated to the requesting phy-
sician or an appropriate representative in a timely manner.
2. Actual or attempted communication should be documented
as appropriate.
3. Signiﬁcant discrepancies between an initial and ﬁnal report
should be promptly reconciled by direct communication.
C. Written Communication
1. Include the items in section D., Contents of a Nuclear Medi-
cine Report, which are appropriate for a particular study.
2. Many items, such as patient identiﬁcation or radiopharma-
ceutical information, can be transferred to the report auto-
matically or entered by a technologist or secretary.
3. The ﬁnal report should be proofread.
4. Electronic signature instead of a written signature is accept-
able if access to the signature mechanism is secure.
5. Copies of the report should be sent to the requesting physi-
cian, made available to other identiﬁed health care workers,
and archived for an appropriate period of time.
D. Contents of a Nuclear Medicine Report
1. Study Identification.
a. Patient name
b. Other information to uniquely identify the patient such as
sex, date of birth, medical record number, or universal
patient code
c. Requesting physician and other appropriate health care
providers such as the primary care physician
d. Type of study
e. Date of study
f. Study accession number (in a well-integrated information sys-
tem, the study accession number may not need to be visible)
g. Completion dates and times
2. Clinical Information.
a. Indications for the study
b. Other relevant history:
 Brief history emphasizing the main reason for the study
for example, memory loss.
 Duration of the problem.
 Other essential clinical information including medications.
 Recent ﬁndings on prior nuclear medicine studies.
 Findings on other imaging modalities such as MRI
c. Information needed for billing such as referral number,
patient status (e.g., inpatient/outpatient), or diagnostic codes
(e.g., ICD-9-CM code)
 Insurance carriers may not accept phrases such as “rule
out” or “possible.”
 List the diagnosis to the highest level of speciﬁcity known
at the time of billing, or if no diagnosis is known, the per-
tinent symptom or sign that led to the procedure.
3. Procedure Description.
a. Radiopharmaceutical (here, [18F]FDG)
b. Administered dose
c. Route of administration
d. Timing
of
imaging
relative
to
radiopharmaceutical
administration
10
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE
 Vol. 00
 No. 00
 XXX 2024



---
[PAGE 11/16]

e. Blood glucose level
f. Imaging technique (Instrumentation used that is, PET with
measured attenuation correction, PET with transmission cor-
rection, attenuation correction with CT or MRI, or dedicated
brain PET scanner with or without CT attenuation correc-
tion), including alteration in normal procedure. that is,
whether the images were acquired using a PET/CT or
PET/MR system, and procedure performed, such as arterial
blood sampling. If CT is acquired for diagnostic purposes,
also include a description of the scanning parameters
including dosimetry. In cases of PET/MR, report the type
of sequences that were acquired during the imaging ses-
sion (e.g., structural MR, T1-w, T2-w, FLAIR, diffusion
weighted, arterial spin labeling, resting-state fMRI, etc.).
g. If sedation is performed, brieﬂy describe the procedure,
including type of medication and time of sedation in rela-
tion to the radiotracer injection.
h. In epileptic patients, brieﬂy describe the procedure of
EEG recording, when performed.
i. Complications or patient reactions
4. Description of Findings.
a. Signiﬁcant positive ﬁndings as well as pertinent negative
ﬁndings should be mentioned. Describe whether [18F]FDG
PET ﬁndings are normal or abnormal. If ﬁndings are
abnormal, describe the location and intensity of abnormal
[18F]FDG uptake. Functional topography can be used as
well as anatomic descriptions.
b. Image quality or other causes of study limitations, for
example, patient motion
c. A reference range may be useful for quantitative values.
d. Correlation with other imaging studies should be documen-
ted in the report describing the date and type of the prior
study. If other studies are not available for correlation, this
should also be mentioned in the written report. Compara-
tive data: Comparisons with previous examinations and
reports, if available, have to be part of the report. Further-
more, results of morphologic imaging modalities should
also be considered for interpretation. Nondiagnostic CT
scans only used for attenuation in PET/CT should be used
with caution for structural interpretation.
5. Impression.
a. A separate impression should be included for all but the
shortest reports.
b. The impression should address the clinical indication for
the scan.
c. If the PET examination presents a generally accepted dis-
ease pattern, this should be said in the conclusion, and if
possible, using a statement that indicates the most proba-
ble diagnosis considering the pattern only in the context of
the clinical presentation and hypothesis. Any (subjective)
interpretation not based on such criteria has to be explic-
itly stated and considered as hypothetical. A differential
diagnosis should be given when appropriate.
6. Comments.
a. Study limitations or source of errors (191):
 Unintended cerebral activation (i.e., visual or motor
activation)
 Artifacts (patient movement during PET acquisition or
between PET and CT/MRI, camera related, induced by
inappropriate processing) as well as MR-based AC
biases (missing bones, air cavities, metal implants etc.)
 Psychotropic drugs or corticosteroid use
 Sedation
 Incomplete intravenous tracer injection
 No or insufﬁcient attenuation correction
 Soft tissue or skull uptake after surgery in the area of
the skull or brain
 Recent radio- or chemotherapy
b. Recommendations for further procedures, if appropriate
c. Documentation of direct communication of results includ-
ing the name of the physician or physician designate and
time/date of contact
d. Comments may be included in the Impression section,
especially when brief.
VIII. EQUIPMENT SPECIFICATION
Equipment speciﬁcation for each procedure is given in the
respective procedure guidelines.
IX. QUALITY CONTROL AND IMPROVEMENT, SAFETY,
INFECTION CONTROL, AND PATIENT
EDUCATION CONCERNS
See also the SNMMI Guideline for General Imaging and
EANM Physics Guidelines
Policies and procedures related to quality, patient education,
infection control, and safety should be developed and implemented
in accordance with the ACR Policy on Quality Control or national
equivalence, and Patient Education Concerns appearing elsewhere
in the ACR Practice Guidelines and Technical Standards book, or
national equivalence.
Physician quality control should also be done regularly to assure
consistent, accurate physician interpretation of results.
Equipment performance monitoring should be in accordance
with ACR Technical Standards for Medical Nuclear Physics Per-
formance Monitoring of CT and Nuclear Medicine Equipment, or
national equivalence.
Information speciﬁc to the procedure should also be included in
each guideline.
X. RADIATION SAFETY IN IMAGING
See also the SNMMI Guideline for General Imaging, and
EANM Dosimetry and Radiopharmaceutical Guidelines
It is the position of SNMMI and EANM that patient exposure
to ionizing radiation should be at the minimum level consistent
with obtaining a diagnostic examination. Reduction in patient radi-
ation exposure may be accomplished by administering less radio-
pharmaceutical when the technique or equipment used for imaging
can support such an action. Each patient procedure is unique
and the methodology to achieve minimum exposure while main-
taining diagnostic accuracy needs to be viewed in this light.
Radiopharmaceutical dose ranges outlined in this document should
be considered as a guide. Dose reduction techniques should be
used when appropriate. The same principles should be applied
when CT is used in a hybrid imaging procedure. CT acquisition
protocols should be optimized to provide the information needed
while minimizing patient radiation exposure. Minimizing radiation
dose is especially important in children.
Infants have a greater relative brain mass (10%) than adults
(2%–3%), so the percentage uptake of injected [18F]FDG is
PROCEDURE STANDARD

Arbizu et al.
11



---
[PAGE 12/16]

higher. Although in new-born infants, sufﬁcient image quality
may be achieved with an injected dose as low as 10 MBq (192)
(in part also based on lower tissue attenuation), the advocated min-
imal dose stated from the pediatric dose card for the EANM is fol-
lowed in these guidelines.
Estimated radiation doses in adults and children are shown in
Table 1.
For CT, the effective dose depends on collimation and scan
type (axial, helical) (193) but is usually lower than 0.3 mSv for a
so-called low-dose CT and typically around 2 mSv or lower for a
diagnostic high-quality CT.
XI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Committee on Guidelines includes Kevin J. Donohoe, MD
(Chair) (Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA); Sue
Abreu, MD (Sue Abreu Consulting, Nichols Hills, OK); Helena
Balon, MD (Beaumont Health System, Royal Oak, MI); Twyla Bar-
tel, DO (UAMS, Little Rock, AR); Paul E. Christian, CNMT, BS,
PET (Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
UT); Dominique Delbeke, MD (Vanderbilt University Medical Cen-
ter, Nashville, TN); Vasken Dilsizian, MD (University of Maryland
Medical Center, Baltimore, MD); Kent Friedman, MD (NYU School
of Medicine, New York, NY); James R. Galt, PhD (Emory University
Hospital, Atlanta, GA); Jay A. Harolds, MD (OUHSC-Department of
Radiologic Science, Edmond, OK); Aaron Jessop, MD (UT MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX); David H. Lewis, MD (Har-
borview Medical Center, Seattle, WA); J. Anthony Parker, MD, PhD
(Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA); James A.
Ponto, RPh, BCNP (University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA); Lynne T.
Roy, CNMT (Cedars/Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA); Scho-
der, MD (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY);
Barry L. Shulkin, MD, MBA (St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN); Michael G. Stabin, PhD (Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN); and Mark Tulchinsky, MD (Milton S. Hershey Med
Center, Hershey, PA).
XII. BOARD OF DIRECTORS APPROVAL DATES
Version 2.0 of this procedure standard was approved June 7, 2024.
XIII. REFERENCES
1. Waxman AD, Herholz K, Lewis DH, et al. Society of Nuclear Medicine proce-
dure guideline for FDG PET brain imaging: version 1. SNMMI website. https://
snmmi.org/common/Uploaded%20ﬁles/Web/Clinical%20Practice/Procedure%20
Standards/2009/Society%20of%20Nuclear%20 Medicine%20Procedure%20
Guideline%20 for%20FDG%20PET%20Brain%20Imaging.pdf. Published February
8, 2009. Accessed September 18, 2024.
2. Guedj E, Varrone A, Boellaard R, et al. EANM procedure guidelines for brain
PET imaging using. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2022;49:632–651.
3. Zimmer ER, Parent MJ, Souza DG, et al. [18F]FDG PET signal is driven by astro-
glial glutamate transport. Nat Neurosci. 2017;20:393–395.
4. Nobili F, Arbizu J, Bouwman F, et al. European Association of Nuclear Medicine
and European Academy of Neurology recommendations for the use of brain. Eur
J Neurol. 2018;25:1201–1217.
5. Ossenkoppele R, Schonhaut DR, Sch€oll M, et al. Tau PET patterns mirror clinical
and neuroanatomical variability in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain. 2016;139:1551–1567.
6. Chetelat G, Desgranges B, Landeau B, et al. Direct voxel-based comparison
between grey matter hypometabolism and atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain.
2008;131:60–71.
7. Kim EJ, Cho SS, Jeong Y, et al. Glucose metabolism in early onset versus late onset
Alzheimer’s disease: an SPM analysis of 120 patients. Brain. 2005;128:1790–1801.
8. Minoshima S, Cross D, Thientunyakit T, Foster NL, Drzezga AF-FDG. PET
imaging in neurodegenerative dementing disorders: insights into subtype classiﬁ-
cation, emerging disease categories, and mixed dementia with copathologies.
J Nucl Med. 2022;63(suppl 1):2S–12S.
9. Jack CR, Bennett DA, Blennow K, et al. NIA-AA research framework: toward a
biological deﬁnition of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2018;14:535–562.
10. Tan MS, Ji X, Li JQ, et al. Longitudinal trajectories of Alzheimer’s ATN bio-
markers in elderly persons without dementia. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2020;12:55.
11. Ou YN, Xu W, Li JQ, et al. FDG-PET as an independent biomarker for Alzhei-
mer’s biological diagnosis: a longitudinal study. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2019;11:57.
12. Caroli A, Prestia A, Galluzzi S, et al. Mild cognitive impairment with suspected non-
amyloid pathology (SNAP): prediction of progression. Neurology. 2015;84:508–515.
13. Iaccarino L, Sala A, Perani D. Initiative AsDN. Predicting long-term clinical stability in
amyloid-positive subjects by FDG-PET. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2019;6:1113–1120.
14. Chetelat G, Arbizu J, Barthel H, et al. Amyloid-PET and 18F-FDG-PET in the
diagnostic investigation of Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias. Lancet Neurol.
2020;19:951–962.
15. Nobili F, Festari C, Altomare D, et al. Automated assessment of FDG-PET for
differential diagnosis in patients with neurodegenerative disorders. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging. 2018;45:1557–1566.
16. McKeith IG, Boeve BF, Dickson DW, et al. Diagnosis and management of
dementia with Lewy bodies: fourth consensus report of the DLB consortium. Neu-
rology. 2017;89:88–100.
17. Rascovsky K, Hodges JR, Knopman D, et al. Sensitivity of revised diagnostic cri-
teria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia. Brain. 2011;134:
2456–2477.
18. Herholz K, Salmon E, Perani D, et al. Discrimination between Alzheimer demen-
tia and controls by automated analysis of multicenter FDG PET. Neuroimage.
2002;17:302–316.
19. Mosconi L, Tsui WH, Herholz K, et al. Multicenter standardized 18F-FDG PET
diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer’s disease, and other demen-
tias. J Nucl Med. 2008;49:390–398.
20. Garibotto V, Herholz K, Boccardi M, et al. Clinical validity of brain ﬂuorodeoxy-
glucose positron emission tomography as a biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease in
the context of a structured 5-phase development framework. Neurobiol Aging.
2017;52:183–195.
TABLE 1
Radiation Dosimetry in Adults and Children
Parameter
Adults
Children
Radiopharmaceutical
[18F]FDG
[18F]FDG
Administered activity*
150–370 MBq (5–10 mCi)
North America: 3.7 MBq/kg (0.1 mCi/kg)
Europe: 5.18–7.4 MBq/kg (0.14–0.20 mCi/kg)
Organ receiving the largest radiation
dose† (mGy/MBq)
Urinary bladder, 0.13
Urinary bladder, 0.34
Effective dose† (mSv/MBq)
0.019
0.056
*Depends on equipment limitations, speciﬁc application, and patient compliance.
†Calculations based on Table C31 in ICRP 128.
12
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE
 Vol. 00
 No. 00
 XXX 2024



---
[PAGE 13/16]

21. Chetelat G, Arbizu J, Barthel H, et al. Finding our way through the labyrinth of
dementia biomarkers. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2021;48:2320–2324.
22. Singh TD, Josephs KA, Machulda MM, et al. Clinical, FDG and amyloid PET
imaging in posterior cortical atrophy. J Neurol. 2015;262:1483–1492.
23. Whitwell JL, Graff-Radford J, Singh TD, et al. F-FDG PET in posterior cortical
atrophy and dementia with lewy bodies. J Nucl Med. 2017;58:632–638.
24. Migliaccio R, Agosta F, Basaia S, et al. Functional brain connectome in posterior
cortical atrophy. Neuroimage Clin. 2020;25:102100.
25. Bouwman F, Orini S, Gandolfo F, et al. Diagnostic utility of FDG-PET in the dif-
ferential diagnosis between different forms of primary progressive aphasia. Eur J
Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2018;45:1526–1533.
26. Salat DH, Robinson ME, Miller DR, Clark DC, McGlinchey RE. Neuroimaging
of deployment-associated traumatic brain injury (TBI) with a focus on mild TBI
(mTBI) since 2009. Brain Inj. 2017;31:1204–1219.
27. Townley RA, Botha H, Graff-Radford J, et al. F-FDG PET-CT pattern in idio-
pathic normal pressure hydrocephalus. Neuroimage Clin. 2018;18:897–902.
28. Watanabe Y. PET/SPECT/MRI/fMRI Studies in the myalgic encephalomyelitis/
chronic fatigue syndrome. In: Dierckx RAJO, Otte A, de Vries EFJ, van Waarde
A, Sommer IE, eds. PET and SPECT in Psychiatry. Springer International Pub-
lishing; 2021:985–1001.
29. Meyer PT, Hellwig S, Blazhenets G, Hosp JA. Molecular imaging ﬁndings on
acute and long-term effects of COVID-19 on the brain: a systematic review.
J Nucl Med. 2022;63:971–980.
30. Guedj E, Campion JY, Dudouet P, et al. F-FDG brain PET hypometabolism
in patients with long COVID. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2021;48:2823–
2833.
31. Verger A, Barthel H, Tolboom N, et al. 2-[18F]-FDG PET for imaging brain
involvement in patients with long COVID: perspective of the EANM neuroimag-
ing committee. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2022;49:3599–3606.
32. Videbech P. PET measurements of brain glucose metabolism and blood ﬂow
in major depressive disorder: a critical review. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2000;
101:11–20.
33. Kimbrell TA, Ketter TA, George MS, et al. Regional cerebral glucose utilization
in patients with a range of severities of unipolar depression. Biol Psychiatry.
2002;51:237–252.
34. Kennedy SH, Evans KR, Kr€uger S, et al. Changes in regional brain glucose
metabolism measured with positron emission tomography after paroxetine treat-
ment of major depression. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;158:899–905.
35. Silverman DH, Small GW, Chang CY, et al. Positron emission tomography in
evaluation of dementia: regional brain metabolism and long-term outcome.
JAMA. 2001;286:2120–2127.
36. Verger A, Grimaldi S, Ribeiro MJ, Frismand S, Guedj E. Single photon emission
computed tomography/positron emission tomography molecular imaging for par-
kinsonism: a fast-developing ﬁeld. Ann Neurol. 2021;90:711–719.
37. Meyer PT, Frings L, R€ucker G, Hellwig S. 18F-FGD PET in Parkinsonism: differential
diagnosis and evaluation of cognitive impairment. J Nucl Med. 2017;58:1888–1898.
38. Walker Z, Gandolfo F, Orini S, et al. Clinical utility of FDG PET in Parkinson’s
disease and atypical parkinsonism associated with dementia. Eur J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging. 2018;45:1534–1545.
39. Whitwell JL, H€oglinger GU, Antonini A, et al. Radiological biomarkers for diagnosis
in PSP: where are we and where do we need to be? Mov Disord. 2017;32:955–971.
40. Niethammer M, Eidelberg D. Metabolic brain networks in translational neurol-
ogy: concepts and applications. Ann Neurol. 2012;72:635–647.
41. Ge J, Wu J, Peng S, et al. Reproducible network and regional topographies of
abnormal glucose metabolism associated with progressive supranuclear palsy:
multivariate and univariate analyses in American and Chinese patient cohorts.
Hum Brain Mapp. 2018;39:2842–2858.
42. Niethammer M, Tang CC, Feigin A, et al. A disease-speciﬁc metabolic brain net-
work associated with corticobasal degeneration. Brain. 2014;137:3036–3046.
43. Martı-Andres G, van Bommel L, Meles SK, et al. Multicenter validation of meta-
bolic abnormalities related to PSP according to the MDS-PSP criteria. Mov Dis-
ord. 2020;35:2009–2018.
44. Eckert T, Barnes A, Dhawan V, et al. FDG PET in the differential diagnosis of
parkinsonian disorders. Neuroimage. 2005;26:912–921.
45. Eckert T, Tang C, Ma Y, et al. Abnormal metabolic networks in atypical parkin-
sonism. Mov Disord. 2008;23:727–733.
46. Meles SK, Renken RJ, Pagani M, et al. Abnormal pattern of brain glucose metab-
olism in Parkinson’s disease: replication in three European cohorts. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging. 2020;47:437–450.
47. Asanuma K, Tang C, Ma Y, et al. Network modulation in the treatment of Parkin-
son’s disease. Brain. 2006;129:2667–2678.
48. Meles SK, Renken RJ, Janzen A, et al. The Metabolic pattern of idiopathic REM
sleep behavior disorder reﬂects early-stage Parkinson disease. J Nucl Med. 2018;
59:1437–1444.
49. Orso B, Mattioli P, Yoon EJ, et al. Validation of the REM behaviour disorder
phenoconversion-related pattern in an independent cohort. Neurol Sci. 2023;44:
3161–3168.
50. Zhao P, Zhang B, Gao S, Li X. Clinical features, MRI, and 18F-FDG-PET in dif-
ferential diagnosis of Parkinson disease from multiple system atrophy. Brain
Behav. 2020;10:e01827.
51. H€oglinger GU, Respondek G, Stamelou M, et al. Clinical diagnosis of progressive supra-
nuclear palsy: the movement disorder society criteria. Mov Disord. 2017;32:853–864.
52. Boxer AL, Yu JT, Golbe LI, Litvan I, Lang AE, H€oglinger GU. Advances in pro-
gressive supranuclear palsy: new diagnostic criteria, biomarkers, and therapeutic
approaches. Lancet Neurol. 2017;16:552–563.
53. Agosta F, Altomare D, Festari C, et al. Clinical utility of FDG-PET in amyotro-
phic lateral sclerosis and Huntington’s disease. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging.
2018;45:1546–1556.
54. van Es MA, Hardiman O, Chio A, et al. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Lancet.
2017;390:2084–2098.
55. Pagani M, €Oberg J, De Carli F, et al. Metabolic spatial connectivity in amyotro-
phic lateral sclerosis as revealed by independent component analysis. Hum Brain
Mapp. 2016;37:942–953.
56. Van Weehaeghe D, Ceccarini J, Delva A, Robberecht W, Van Damme P, Van Laere
K. Prospective validation of 18F-FDG brain PET discriminant analysis methods in
the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Nucl Med. 2016;57:1238–1243.
57. Van Laere K, Vanhee A, Verschueren J, et al. Value of 18ﬂuorodeoxyglucose-
positron-emission tomography in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a prospective
study. JAMA Neurol. 2014;71:553–561.
58. Van Weehaeghe D, Devrome M, Schramm G, et al. Combined brain and spinal
FDG PET allows differentiation between ALS and ALS mimics. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging. 2020;47:2681–2690.
59. Tang CC, Feigin A, Ma Y, et al. Metabolic network as a progression biomarker
of premanifest Huntington’s disease. J Clin Invest. 2013;123:4076–4088.
60. Feigin A, Tang C, Ma Y, et al. Thalamic metabolism and symptom onset in pre-
clinical Huntington’s disease. Brain. 2007;130:2858–2867.
61. Herben-Dekker M, van Oostrom JC, Roos RA, et al. Striatal metabolism and psy-
chomotor speed as predictors of motor onset in Huntington’s disease. J Neurol.
2014;261:1387–1397.
62. Ciarmiello A, Giovacchini G, Orobello S, Bruselli L, Elifani F, Squitieri F.
18F-FDG PET uptake in the pre-Huntington disease caudate affects the time-to-
onset independently of CAG expansion size. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2012;
39:1030–1036.
63. Hellem MNN, Vinther-Jensen T, Anderberg L, et al. Hybrid 2-[18F] FDG
PET/MRI in premanifest Huntington’s disease gene-expansion carriers: the signif-
icance of partial volume correction. PLoS One. 2021;16:e0252683.
64. Peralta C, Biafore F, Depetris TS, Bastianello M. Recent advancement and clini-
cal implications of 18FDG-PET in Parkinson’s disease, atypical parkinsonisms,
and other movement disorders. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2019;19:56.
65. Verger A, Lagarde S, Maillard L, Bartolomei F, Guedj E. Brain molecular imag-
ing in pharmacoresistant focal epilepsy: current practice and perspectives. Rev
Neurol (Paris). 2018;174:16–27.
66. Guedj E, Bonini F, Gavaret M, et al. 18FDG-PET in different subtypes of tem-
poral lobe epilepsy: SEEG validation and predictive value. Epilepsia. 2015;
56:414–421.
67. Lagarde S, Boucekine M, McGonigal A, et al. Relationship between PET metabo-
lism and SEEG epileptogenicity in focal lesional epilepsy. Eur J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging. 2020;47:3130–3142.
68. Henry TR, Votaw JR. The role of positron emission tomography with [18F]ﬂuoro-
deoxyglucose in the evaluation of the epilepsies. Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 2004;
14:517–535.
69. Van Paesschen W, Dupont P, Sunaert S, Gofﬁn K, Van Laere K. The use of
SPECT and PET in routine clinical practice in epilepsy. Curr Opin Neurol. 2007;
20:194–202.
70. Traub-Weidinger T, Arbizu J, Barthel H, et al. EANM practice guidelines for an
appropriate use of PET and SPECT for patients with epilepsy. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging. 2024;51:1891–1908.
71. Spencer SS. The relative contributions of MRI, SPECT, and PET imaging in epi-
lepsy. Epilepsia. 1994;35(suppl 6):S72–S89.
72. Gok B, Jallo G, Hayeri R, Wahl R, Aygun N. The evaluation of FDG-PET imag-
ing for epileptogenic focus localization in patients with MRI positive and MRI
negative temporal lobe epilepsy. Neuroradiology. 2013;55:541–550.
73. LoPinto-Khoury C, Sperling MR, Skidmore C, et al. Surgical outcome in PET-positive,
MRI-negative patients with temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2012;53:342–348.
74. Dupont S, Semah F, Clemenceau S, Adam C, Baulac M, Samson Y. Accurate
prediction of postoperative outcome in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: a study
using positron emission tomography with 18ﬂuorodeoxyglucose. Arch Neurol.
2000;57:1331–1336.
PROCEDURE STANDARD

Arbizu et al.
13



---
[PAGE 14/16]

75. Vinton AB, Carne R, Hicks RJ, et al. The extent of resection of FDG-PET hypo-
metabolism relates to outcome of temporal lobectomy. Brain. 2007;130:548–560.
76. Tomas J, Pittau F, Hammers A, et al. The predictive value of hypometabolism in
focal epilepsy: a prospective study in surgical candidates. Eur J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging. 2019;46:1806–1816.
77. Akanuma N, Reed LJ, Marsden PK, et al. Hemisphere-speciﬁc episodic memory
networks in the human brain: a correlation study between intracarotid amobarbital
test and [18F]FDG-PET. J Cogn Neurosci. 2009;21:605–622.
78. Weintrob DL, Saling MM, Berkovic SF, Berlangieri SU, Reutens DC. Verbal
memory in left temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence for task-related localization. Ann
Neurol. 2002;51:442–447.
79. Benedetti L, Franciotta D, Zoccarato M, et al. Post-therapy normalization of brain
FDG-PET in Morvan’s syndrome. J Neurol Sci. 2015;353:175–176.
80. Mauro D, Barbagallo GD, Angelo S, et al. Role of positron emission tomography
for central nervous system involvement in systemic autoimmune diseases: status
and perspectives. Curr Med Chem. 2018;25:3096–3104.
81. Graus F, Titulaer MJ, Balu R, et al. A clinical approach to diagnosis of autoim-
mune encephalitis. Lancet Neurol. 2016;15:391–404.
82. Morbelli S, Arbizu J, Booij J, Chen MK, Chetelat G, Cross DJ, et al. The need of
standardization and of large clinical studies in an emerging indication of
[18F]FDG PET: the autoimmune encephalitis. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging.
2017;44:353–357.
83. Kalra S, Tripathi M, Sonar RS, et al. Role of FDG PET/CT in deﬁnitive and pre-
sumed autoimmune encephalitis. Nucl Med Commun. 2024;45:121–127.
84. Liang M, Niu N, Jia C, et al. Diagnostic superiority of 18F-FDG PET over MRI in
detecting anti-LGI1 autoimmune encephalitis: a comparative study with insights
into faciobrachial dystonic seizures mechanisms and recurrence identiﬁcation.
Clin Nucl Med. 2023;48:e516–e522.
85. Sadaghiani MS, Roman S, Diaz-Arias LA, et al. Comparison of quantitative
FDG-PET and MRI in anti-LGI1 autoimmune encephalitis. Neuroradiology.
2023;65:1225–1238.
86. Yin Y, Wu J, Wu S, et al. Usefulness of brain FDG PET/CT imaging in pediatric
patients with suspected autoimmune encephalitis from a prospective study. Eur J
Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2022;49:1918–1929.
87. Bordonne M, Chawki MB, Doyen M, et al. Brain 18F-FDG PET for the diagnosis
of autoimmune encephalitis: a systematic review and a meta-analysis. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging. 2021;48:3847–3858.
88. De Leiris N, Ruel B, Vervandier J, et al. Decrease in the cortex/striatum metabolic
ratio on [18F]-FDG PET: a biomarker of autoimmune encephalitis. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging. 2021;49:921–931.
89. Baumgartner A, Rauer S, Mader I, Meyer PT. Cerebral FDG-PET and MRI ﬁnd-
ings in autoimmune limbic encephalitis: correlation with autoantibody types.
J Neurol. 2013;260:2744–2753.
90. Morbelli S, Djekidel M, Hesse S, et al. Role of 18F-FDG-PET imaging in the
diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis. Lancet Neurol. 2016;15:1009–1010.
91. Albert NL, Weller M, Suchorska B, et al. Response Assessment in Neuro-Oncology
working group and European Association for Neuro-Oncology recommendations for
the clinical use of PET imaging in gliomas. Neuro-oncol. 2016;18:1199–1208.
92. Prieto E, Martı-Climent JM, Domınguez-Prado I, et al. Voxel-based analysis of
dual-time-point 18F-FDG PET images for brain tumor identiﬁcation and delinea-
tion. J Nucl Med. 2011;52:865–872.
93. Marcus C, Feizi P, Hogg J, et al. Imaging in differentiating cerebral toxoplasmosis and
primary CNS lymphoma with special focus on FDG PET/CT. AJR. 2021;216:157–164.
94. Gupta T, Manjali JJ, Kannan S, Purandare N, Rangarajan V. Diagnostic perfor-
mance of pretreatment 18F-ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
with or without computed tomography in patients with primary central nervous
system lymphoma: updated systematic review and diagnostic test accuracy meta-
analyses. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2021;21:497–507.
95. Rozenblum L, Galanaud D, Houillier C, et al. [18F]FDG PET-MRI provides sur-
vival biomarkers in primary central nervous system lymphoma in the elderly: an
ancillary study from the BLOCAGE trial of the LOC network. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging. 2023;50:3684–3696.
96. Park HY, Suh CH, Huang RY, Guenette JP, Kim HS. Diagnostic yield of body
CT and whole-body FDG PET/CT for initial systemic staging in patients with sus-
pected primary CNS lymphoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. AJR.
2021;216:1172–1182.
97. Kawase Y, Yamamoto Y, Kameyama R, Kawai N, Kudomi N, Nishiyama Y.
Comparison of 11C-methionine PET and 18F-FDG PET in patients with primary
central nervous system lymphoma. Mol Imaging Biol. 2011;13:1284–1289.
98. Law I, Albert NL, Arbizu J, et al. Joint EANM/EANO/RANO practice
guidelines/SNMMI procedure standards for imaging of gliomas using PET with
radiolabelled amino acids and [18F]FDG: version 1.0. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imag-
ing. 2019;46:540–557.
99. Colavolpe C, Metellus P, Mancini J, et al. Independent prognostic value of pre-
treatment 18-FDG-PET in high-grade gliomas. J Neurooncol. 2012;107:527–535.
100. Colavolpe C, Chinot O, Metellus P, et al. FDG-PET predicts survival in recurrent
high-grade gliomas treated with bevacizumab and irinotecan. Neuro-oncol. 2012;
14:649–657.
101. Kaschten B, Stevenaert A, Sadzot B, et al. Preoperative evaluation of 54 gliomas
by PET with ﬂuorine-18-ﬂuorodeoxyglucose and/or carbon-11-methionine.
J Nucl Med. 1998;39:778–785.
102. de Zwart PL, van Dijken BRJ, Holtman GA, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of PET
tracers for the differentiation of tumor progression from treatment-related changes
in high-grade glioma: a systematic review and metaanalysis. J Nucl Med. 2020;
61:498–504.
103. Pietrzak A, Marszałek A, Kunikowska J, et al. Detection of clinically silent brain
lesions in [18F]FDG PET/CT study in oncological patients: analysis of over
10,000 studies. Sci Rep. 2021;11:18293.
104. Spanaki MV, Siegel H, Kopylev L, et al. The effect of vigabatrin (gamma-
vinyl GABA) on cerebral blood ﬂow and metabolism. Neurology. 1999;53:
1518–1522.
105. Liu S, Wang Y, Xu K, et al. Voxel-based comparison of brain glucose metabo-
lism between patients with Cushing’s disease and healthy subjects. Neuroimage
Clin. 2017;17:354–358.
106. Phelps ME, Huang SC, Hoffman EJ, Selin C, Sokoloff L, Kuhl DE. Tomo-
graphic measurement of local cerebral glucose metabolic rate in humans with
(F-18)2-ﬂuoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose: validation of method. Ann Neurol. 1979;
6:371–388.
107. Jamar F, Buscombe J, Chiti A, et al. EANM/SNMMI guideline for 18F-FDG use
in inﬂammation and infection. J Nucl Med. 2013;54:647–658.
108. Clifford AH, Murphy EM, Burrell SC, et al. Positron emission tomography/
computerized tomography in newly diagnosed patients with giant cell arteritis
who are taking glucocorticoids. J Rheumatol. 2017;44:1859–1866.
109. Berman SM, Voytek B, Mandelkern MA, et al. Changes in cerebral glucose
metabolism during early abstinence from chronic methamphetamine abuse. Mol
Psychiatry. 2008;13:897–908.
110. Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Shokri Kojori E, Fowler JS, Benveniste H, Tomasi D.
Alcohol decreases baseline brain glucose metabolism more in heavy drinkers than
controls but has no effect on stimulation-induced metabolic increases. J Neurosci.
2015;35:3248–3255.
111. Advisory Committee on Medical Uses of Isotopes (ACMUI) Sub-Committee on
Nursing Mother Guidelines for the Medical Administration of Radioactive Mate-
rials. ACMUI website. https://www.nrc.gov/docs/ML1903/ML19038A498.pdf.
Published January 31, 2019. Accessed September 18, 2024.
112. Ishizu K, Nishizawa S, Yonekura Y, et al. Effects of hyperglycemia on FDG
uptake in human brain and glioma. J Nucl Med. 1994;35:1104–1109.
113. Sarikaya I, Sarikaya A, Sharma P. Assessing the effect of various blood glucose
levels on 18F-FDG activity in the brain, liver, and blood pool. J Nucl Med Tech-
nol. 2019;47:313–318.
114. Apostolova I, Lange C, Suppa P, et al. Impact of plasma glucose level on the pat-
tern of brain FDG uptake and the predictive power of FDG PET in mild cognitive
impairment. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2018;45:1417–1422.
115. Henriksen OM, Holm S, Marner L, Law I. Effect of blood glucose and body
weight on image quality in brain [18F]FDG PET imaging. Nucl Med Commun.
2020;41:1265–1274.
116. Eskian M, Alavi A, Khorasanizadeh M, et al. Effect of blood glucose level on
standardized uptake value (SUV) in 18F-FDG PET-scan: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of 20,807 individual SUV measurements. Eur J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging. 2019;46:224–237.
117. Byun MS, Kim HJ, Yi D, et al. Region-speciﬁc association between basal blood
insulin and cerebral glucose metabolism in older adults. Neuroimage Clin. 2019;
22:101765.
118. Biessels GJ, Nobili F, Teunissen CE, Simo R, Scheltens P. Understanding multi-
factorial brain changes in type 2 diabetes: a biomarker perspective. Lancet Neurol.
2020;19:699–710.
119. Viglianti BL, Wale DJ, Ma T, et al. Effects of plasma glucose levels on regional
cerebral 18F-ﬂuorodeoxyglucose uptake: implications for dementia evaluation
with brain PET imaging. Biomed Pharmacother. 2019;112:108628.
120. Cranston I, Marsden P, Matyka K, et al. Regional differences in cerebral blood
ﬂow and glucose utilization in diabetic man: the effect of insulin. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab. 1998;18:130–140.
121. Hasselbalch SG, Knudsen GM, Videbaek C, et al. No effect of insulin on glucose
blood-brain barrier transport and cerebral metabolism in humans. Diabetes. 1999;
48:1915–1921.
122. Varrone A, Asenbaum S, Vander Borght T, et al. EANM procedure guidelines for
PET brain imaging using [18F]FDG, version 2. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging.
2009;36:2103–2110.
123. Lassmann M, Treves ST, Group ESPDHW. Paediatric radiopharmaceutical
administration: harmonization of the 2007 EANM paediatric dosage card (version
14
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE
 Vol. 00
 No. 00
 XXX 2024



---
[PAGE 15/16]

1.5.2008) and the 2010 North American consensus guidelines. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging. 2014;41:1036–1041.
124. Treves ST, Gelfand MJ, Fahey FH, Parisi MT. 2016 update of the North Ameri-
can Consensus Guidelines for pediatric administered radiopharmaceutical activi-
ties. J Nucl Med. 2016;57:15N–18N.
125. Rausch I, Ruiz A, Valverde-Pascual I, Cal-Gonzalez J, Beyer T, Carrio I. Perfor-
mance evaluation of the Vereos PET/CT system according to the NEMA NU2-
2012 standard. J Nucl Med. 2019;60:561–567.
126. Hsu DFC, Ilan E, Peterson WT, Uribe J, Lubberink M, Levin CS. Studies of a
next-generation silicon-photomultiplier-based time-of-ﬂight PET/CT system.
J Nucl Med. 2017;58:1511–1518.
127. van Sluis J, de Jong J, Schaar J, et al. Performance characteristics of the digital
Biograph Vision PET/CT system. J Nucl Med. 2019;60:1031–1036.
128. van Sluis J, Boellaard R, Somasundaram A, et al. Image quality and semiquantita-
tive measurements on the Biograph Vision PET/CT system: initial experiences
and comparison with the Biograph mCT. J Nucl Med. 2020;61:129–135.
129. Chen S, Hu P, Gu Y, Yu H, Shi H. Performance characteristics of the digital
uMI550 PET/CT system according to the NEMA NU2-2018 standard. EJNMMI
Phys. 2020;7:43.
130. Salvadori J, Imbert L, Perrin M, et al. Head-to-head comparison of image quality
between brain. EJNMMI Res. 2019;9:61.
131. Rausch I, Quick HH, Cal-Gonzalez J, Sattler B, Boellaard R, Beyer T. Technical
and instrumentational foundations of PET/MRI. Eur J Radiol. 2017;94:A3–A13.
132. Chen Y, Ying C, Binkley MM, et al. Deep learning-based T1-enhanced selection
of linear attenuation coefﬁcients (DL-TESLA) for PET/MR attenuation correction
in dementia neuroimaging. Magn Reson Med. 2021;86:499–513.
133. Mecheter I, Alic L, Abbod M, Amira A, Ji JMR. Image-based attenuation correc-
tion of brain PET imaging: review of literature on machine learning approaches
for segmentation. J Digit Imaging. 2020;33:1224–1241.
134. Hofmann M, Pichler B, Sch€olkopf B, Beyer T. Towards quantitative PET/MRI: a
review of MR-based attenuation correction techniques. Eur J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging. 2009;36(suppl 1):S93–S104.
135. De Luca F, Bolin M, Blomqvist L, Wassberg C, Martin H, Falk Delgado A. Vali-
dation of PET/MRI attenuation correction methodology in the study of brain
tumours. BMC Med Imaging. 2020;20:126.
136. Ladefoged CN, Hansen AE, Henriksen OM, et al. AI-driven attenuation correc-
tion for brain PET/MRI: clinical evaluation of a dementia cohort and importance
of the training group size. Neuroimage. 2020;222:117221.
137. Ladefoged CN, Law I, Anazodo U, et al. A multi-centre evaluation of eleven clin-
ically feasible brain PET/MRI attenuation correction techniques using a large
cohort of patients. Neuroimage. 2017;147:346–359.
138. Ladefoged CN, Andersen FL, Kjær A, Højgaard L, Law I. RESOLUTE
PET/MRI attenuation correction for O-(2-18F-ﬂuoroethyl)-L-tyrosine (FET) in
brain tumor patients with metal implants. Front Neurosci. 2017;11:453.
139. Chang LT. A method for attenuation correction in radionuclide computed tomog-
raphy. IEEE Trans Nucl Sci. 1978;25:638–643.
140. Chen WP, Matsunari I, Noda A, et al. Rapid scanning protocol for brain 18F-FDG
PET: a validation study. J Nucl Med. 2005;46:1633–1641.
141. Verger A, Guedj E. The renaissance of functional F-18-FDG PET brain activation
imaging. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2018;45:2338–2341.
142. Rousseau PF, Malbos E, Verger A, et al. Increase of precuneus metabolism corre-
lates with reduction of PTSD symptoms after EMDR therapy in military veterans:
an 18F-FDG PET study during virtual reality exposure to war. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging. 2019;46:1817–1821.
143. Verger A, Malbos E, Reynaud E, et al. Brain metabolism and related connectivity
in patients with acrophobia treated by virtual reality therapy: an 18F-FDG PET
pilot study sensitized by virtual exposure. EJNMMI Res. 2018;8:93.
144. Cardier M, Zulueta-Santos C, Manrique-Huarte R, et al. Functional neuroim-
aging studies in asymmetric hearing loss. Audiol Neurootol. 2015;20(suppl 1):
48–52.
145. Schreckenberger M, Spetzger U, Sabri O, et al. Localisation of motor areas in
brain tumour patients: a comparison of preoperative [18F]FDG-PET and intrao-
perative cortical electrostimulation. Eur J Nucl Med. 2001;28:1394–1403.
146. Herholz K, Pietrzyk U, Karbe H, W€urker M, Wienhard K, Heiss WD. Individual
metabolic anatomy of repeating words demonstrated by MRI-guided positron
emission tomography. Neurosci Lett. 1994;182:47–50.
147. Villien M, Wey HY, Mandeville JB, et al. Dynamic functional imaging of brain
glucose utilization using fPET-FDG. Neuroimage. 2014;100:192–199.
148. Tsutsui Y, Awamoto S, Himuro K, Umezu Y, Baba S, Sasaki M. Edge artifacts in
point spread function-based PET reconstruction in relation to object size and
reconstruction parameters. Asia Ocean J Nucl Med Biol. 2017;5:134–143.
149. Matti A, Lima GM, Pettinato C, Pietrobon F, Martinelli F, Fanti S. How do the
more recent reconstruction algorithms affect the interpretation criteria of PET/CT
images? Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2019;53:216–222.
150. PET acquisition. ADNI website. https://adni.loni.usc.edu/data-samples/adni-data/
neuroimaging/pet/.
151. SCAN website. https://scan.naccdata.org/.
152. Verwer EE, Golla SSV, Kaalep A, et al. Harmonisation of PET/CT contrast recovery
performance for brain studies. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2021;48:2856–2870.
153. Brain PET/CT Accreditation. EARL website. https://earl.eanm.org/18f-brain-pet-ct/.
154. Herholz K. Guidance for reading FDG PET scans in dementia patients. Q J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging. 2014;58:332–343.
155. Ohnishi T, Hoshi H, Nagamachi S, et al. High-resolution SPECT to assess
hippocampal perfusion in neuropsychiatric diseases. J Nucl Med. 1995;36:1163–
1169.
156. Petersen RC, Aisen PS, Beckett LA, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative (ADNI): clinical characterization. Neurology. 2010;74:201–209.
157. Caminiti SP, Sala A, Presotto L, et al. Validation of FDG-PET datasets of normal
controls for the extraction of SPM-based brain metabolism maps. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging. 2021;48:2486–2499.
158. Thomas BA, Erlandsson K, Modat M, et al. The importance of appropriate partial
volume correction for PET quantiﬁcation in Alzheimer’s disease. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging. 2011;38:1104–1119.
159. Yang J, Hu C, Guo N, et al. Partial volume correction for PET quantiﬁcation and
its impact on brain network in Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Rep. 2017;7:13035.
160. Lopez-Gonzalez FJ, Silva-Rodrıguez J, Paredes-Pacheco J, et al. Intensity nor-
malization methods in brain FDG-PET quantiﬁcation. Neuroimage. 2020;222:
117229.
161. Mortensen KN, Gjedde A, Thompson GJ, et al. Impact of global mean normaliza-
tion on regional glucose metabolism in the human brain. Neural Plast. 2018;
2018:6120925.
162. Borghammer P, Jonsdottir KY, Cumming P, et al. Normalization in PET group
comparison studies–the importance of a valid reference region. Neuroimage.
2008;40:529–540.
163. Borghammer P. Perfusion and metabolism imaging studies in Parkinson’s disease.
Dan Med J. 2012;59:B4466.
164. Yakushev I, Landvogt C, Buchholz HG, et al. Choice of reference area in studies
of Alzheimer’s disease using positron emission tomography with ﬂuorodeoxyglu-
cose-F18. Psychiatry Res. 2008;164:143–153.
165. Zhang H, Wu P, Ziegler SI, et al. Data-driven identiﬁcation of intensity nor-
malization region based on longitudinal coherency of. Neuroimage. 2017;
146:589–599.
166. Morbelli S, Arbizu J, Booij J, et al. The need of standardization and of large clinical
studies in an emerging indication of. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2017;44:353–357.
167. Drzezga A, Arnold S, Minoshima S, et al. 18F-FDG PET studies in patients with
extratemporal and temporal epilepsy: evaluation of an observer-independent anal-
ysis. J Nucl Med. 1999;40:737–746.
168. Minoshima S, Frey KA, Koeppe RA, Foster NL, Kuhl DE. A diagnostic approach
in Alzheimer’s disease using three-dimensional stereotactic surface projections of
ﬂuorine-18-FDG PET. J Nucl Med. 1995;36:1238–1248.
169. Perovnik M, Rus T, Schindlbeck KA, Eidelberg D. Functional brain networks in
the evaluation of patients with neurodegenerative disorders. Nat Rev Neurol.
2023;19:73–90.
170. Spetsieris PG, Eidelberg D. Scaled subproﬁle modeling of resting state imaging
data in Parkinson’s disease: methodological issues. Neuroimage. 2011;54:2899–
2914.
171. Schelbert HR, Hoh CK, Royal HD, et al. Procedure guideline for tumor imaging
using ﬂuorine-18-FDG. Society of Nuclear Medicine. J Nucl Med. 1998;39:
1302–1305.
172. Phelps ME. PET: the merging of biology and imaging into molecular imaging.
J Nucl Med. 2000;41:661–681.
173. Lucignani G, Schmidt KC, Moresco RM, et al. Measurement of regional cere-
bral glucose utilization with ﬂuorine-18-FDG and PET in heterogeneous tis-
sues: theoretical considerations and practical procedure. J Nucl Med. 1993;
34:360–369.
174. Henry TR, Engel J, Mazziotta JC. Clinical evaluation of interictal ﬂuorine-18-
ﬂuorodeoxyglucose PET in partial epilepsy. J Nucl Med. 1993;34:1892–1898.
175. Palard-Novello X, Visser D, Tolboom N, et al. Validation of image-derived input
function using a long axial ﬁeld of view PET/CT scanner for two different tracers.
EJNMMI Phys. 2024;11:25.
176. Graham MM, Muzi M, Spence AM, et al. The FDG lumped constant in normal
human brain. J Nucl Med. 2002;43:1157–1166.
177. Hasselbalch SG, Madsen PL, Knudsen GM, Holm S, Paulson OB. Calculation of
the FDG lumped constant by simultaneous measurements of global glucose and
FDG metabolism in humans. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1998;18:154–160.
178. Spence AM, Muzi M, Graham MM, et al. Glucose metabolism in human malig-
nant gliomas measured quantitatively with PET, 1-[C-11]glucose and FDG: anal-
ysis of the FDG lumped constant. J Nucl Med. 1998;39:440–448.
PROCEDURE STANDARD

Arbizu et al.
15



---
[PAGE 16/16]

179. Owen OE, Morgan AP, Kemp HG, Sullivan JM, Herrera MG, Cahill GF. Brain
metabolism during fasting. J Clin Invest. 1967;46:1589–1595.
180. Redies C, Hoffer LJ, Beil C, et al. Generalized decrease in brain glucose metabolism
during fasting in humans studied by PET. Am J Physiol. 1989;256:E805–E810.
181. Cecchin D, Garibotto V, Law I, Gofﬁn K. PET imaging in neurodegeneration and
neuro-oncology: variants and pitfalls. Semin Nucl Med. 2021;51:408–418.
182. Kono AK, Ishii K, Sofue K, Miyamoto N, Sakamoto S, Mori E. Fully automatic dif-
ferential diagnosis system for dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer’s disease
using FDG-PET and 3D-SSP. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2007;34:1490–1497.
183. Burdette JH, Minoshima S, Vander Borght T, Tran DD, Kuhl DE. Alzheimer dis-
ease: improved visual interpretation of PET images by using three-dimensional
stereotaxic surface projections. Radiology. 1996;198:837–843.
184. Lehman VT, Carter RE, Claassen DO, et al. Visual assessment versus quantitative
three-dimensional stereotactic surface projection ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography for detection of mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer
disease. Clin Nucl Med. 2012;37:721–726.
185. Morbelli S, Brugnolo A, Bossert I, et al. Visual versus semi-quantitative analysis
of 18F-FDG-PET in amnestic MCI: an European Alzheimer’s Disease Consortium
(EADC) project. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;44:815–826.
186. Perani D, Della Rosa PA, Cerami C, et al. Validation of an optimized SPM proce-
dure for FDG-PET in dementia diagnosis in a clinical setting. Neuroimage Clin.
2014;6:445–454.
187. Frisoni GB, Bocchetta M, Chetelat G, et al. Imaging markers for Alzheimer dis-
ease: which vs how. Neurology. 2013;81:487–500.
188. Signorini M, Paulesu E, Friston K, et al. Rapid assessment of regional cerebral
metabolic abnormalities in single subjects with quantitative and nonquantitative
[18F]FDG PET: A clinical validation of statistical parametric mapping. Neuro-
image. 1999;9:63–80.
189. Ishii K, Kono AK, Sasaki H, et al. Fully automatic diagnostic system for early-
and late-onset mild Alzheimer’s disease using FDG PET and 3D-SSP. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging. 2006;33:575–583.
190. Wagatsuma K, Sakata M, Ishibashi K, et al. Direct comparison of brain [18F]FDG
images acquired by SiPM-based and PMT-based PET/CT: phantom and clinical
studies. EJNMMI Phys. 2020;7:70.
191. Cook GJ, Maisey MN, Fogelman I. Normal variants, artefacts and interpretative
pitfalls in PET imaging with 18-ﬂuoro-2-deoxyglucose and carbon-11 methio-
nine. Eur J Nucl Med. 1999;26:1363–1378.
192. Ruotsalainen U, Suhonen-Polvi H, Eronen E, et al. Estimated radiation dose to
the newborn in FDG-PET studies. J Nucl Med. 1996;37:387–393.
193. Wu TH, Huang YH, Lee JJ, Wang SY, Wang SC, Su CT, et al. Radiation exposure
during transmission measurements: comparison between CT- and germanium-
based techniques with a current PET scanner. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2004;
31:38–43.
16
THE JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR MEDICINE
 Vol. 00
 No. 00
 XXX 2024

