# ESGO_ESHRE_ESGE_FertilitySparing_Pocket_2025


---
[PAGE 1/28]

FERTILITY-SPARING
TREATMENT
Cervical cancer
Ovarian cancer
Borderline ovarian
tumours
POCKET
GUIDELINES
PUBLISHED IN 2024



---
[PAGE 2/28]

2



---
[PAGE 3/28]

3
POCKET GUIDELINES
Based on
ESGO-ESHRE-ESGE guidelines
for the fertility-sparing treatment
and follow-up in patients with cervical
cancer, ovarian cancer, and borderline
ovarian tumours
Morice, P., Scambia, G., … Grynberg, M. (2024). Fertility-sparing treatment and follow-up
in patients with cervical cancer, ovarian cancer, and borderline ovarian tumours: guidelines
from ESGO, ESHRE, and ESGE. Lancet Oncology. Nov;25(11):e602-e610.
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(24)00262-6



---
[PAGE 4/28]

4
A strong collaboration was established between the European Society of Gynaecolo-
gical Oncology (ESGO), the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryo-
logy (ESHRE), and the European Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy (ESGE), ai-
ming to develop clinically relevant and evidence-based guidelines focusing on key
aspects of fertility-sparing treatments of patients with gynaecological malignancies.
A first Pocket Guideline focusing on endometrial carcinoma was published in 2023.
In this Pocket Guideline, three main topics are addressed:
1. The indications of fertility-sparing treatment including conservative surgeries, stage-by-
-stage and histotype-by-histotype (if required); focusing on ovarian tumours (ie, borderline,
non-epithelial, and epithelial cancers) and cervical cancers in which modalities and indica-
tions of conservative treatments are highly debated.
2. The optimisation of fertility results and management of infertility if occurred.
3. The aftercare management, which presents major practical questions.
Fertility-sparing surgery, in these ESGO/ESHRE/ESGE guidelines, is based on the preservation
of the uterus and at least one part of one ovary, with the aim to achieve (spontaneous)
pregnancy. When both ovaries are macroscopically involved (or at greater oncological risk
of bilateral spread) in ovarian tumours, isolated uterine preservation (with bilateral sal-
pingo-oophorectomy) is discussed. Tumour histological subtypes and staging are defined
according to the WHO Classification of Tumours and the International Federation of Gyne-
cology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging systems (2021 for the ovary, tube, and peritoneum,
and 2019 for the cervix).
The guidelines were developed using a five-step process as defined by the ESGO Guideline
Committee:
Nomination of multidisciplinary international development group
Identification of scientific evidence
Formulation of guidelines
External evaluation of guidelines (international review)
Integration of international reviewers’ comments
The objectives of these ESGO/ESHRE/ESGE guidelines are to improve the quality of ferti-
lity-sparing strategies in ovarian and cervical cancers and harmonise them to be used by
all health professionals involved in the fertility-sparing treatment of patients with cervical
cancers, ovarian cancers, or borderline ovarian tumours, across all allied disciplines.



---
[PAGE 5/28]

5
I
Evidence from at least one large randomised, controlled trial of good methodologi-
cal quality (low potential for bias) or meta-analyses of well conducted, randomised
trials without heterogeneity
II	 Small randomised trials or large randomised trials with a suspicion of bias (lower
methodological quality) or meta-analyses of such trials or of trials with demonstra-
ted heterogeneity
III	 Prospective cohort studies
IV	 Retrospective cohort studies or case-control studies
V	 Studies without control group, case reports, expert opinions
LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
A	 Strong evidence for efﬁcacy with a substantial clinical beneﬁt, strongly recommended
B	 Strong or moderate evidence for efﬁcacy but with a limited clinical beneﬁt, gene-
rally recommended
C	 Insufﬁcient evidence for efﬁcacy or beneﬁt does not outweigh the risk or the dis-
advantages (adverse events, costs…), optional
D	 Moderate evidence against efﬁcacy or for adverse outcome, generally not recom-
mended
E	 Strong evidence against efﬁcacy or for adverse outcome, never recommended
GRADES OF RECOMMENDATIONS
These guidelines exclude the procedures used to protect gonads and maintain endo-
crine functions of the ovaries (ovarian transposition, gonadotrophin hormone-releasing
hormone agonists, etc), combined with ovarian transposition, uterine transplantation,
and surrogate pregnancy. Gonadotoxicity induced by systemic or radiotherapies are not
covered. These guidelines do not include any economic analysis of the strategies. Any
clinician seeking to apply or consult these guidelines is expected to use independent
medical judgment in the context of individual clinical circumstances to determine any
patient’s care or treatment.
To ensure that the statements were evidence based, the current literature was reviewed
and critically appraised. A systematic, unbiased literature review of relevant studies pub-
lished between January 2003 and June 2023 was carried out.
The guidelines were adopted if they were supported by sufficient high level of scientific
evidence and/or when a large consensus among experts was obtained. An adapted ver-
sion of the “Infectious Diseases Society of America-United States Public Health Service
Grading System” was used to define the level of evidence and grade of recommendation
for each of the recommendations:



---
[PAGE 6/28]

6
NAME
SPECIALTY
AFFILIATION
Philippe Morice
Gynecologic oncologist (chair)
Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif (France)

Université Paris Saclay, Paris (France)
Giovanni Scambia
Endoscopist, surgeon (chair)
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A Gemelli

IRCCS, Rome (Italy)
Michaël Grynberg
Onco-fertility specialist (chair)
Université Paris Saclay, Paris (France)

Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Clamart (France)

Hôpital Jean Verdier, Bondy (France)
François Planchamp
Methodologist
Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, (France)
Nadeem R Abu-Rustum
Gynecologic oncologist
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,

New York, NY (USA)
Maribel Acien
Reproductive surgeon
Institute of Women’s Health, University College

London, London (UK),

Miguel Hernandez University, Alicante (Spain)
Alessandro Arena
Gynecologist
IRCCS, Azienda Ospedaliero Univeristaria di

Bologna, Bologna (Italy), University of Bologna,

Bologna (Italy)
Sara Brucker
Gynecologic oncologist
University of Tübingen, Tübingen (Germany)

University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen (Germany)
Ying Cheong
Reproductive medicine specialist	 Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,

Southampton (UK)
Pierre Collinet
Gynecologist
Hôpital Privé le Bois, Groupe Ramsay Lille

Metropole, Lille (France)
Francesco Fanfani
Gynecologic oncologist
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A Gemelli

IRCCS, Rome (Italy)
Francesca Filippi
Gynecologist
Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale

Maggiore Policlinico, Milan (Italy)
Ane Gerda Zahl Eriksson	 Gynecologic oncologist
The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University

Hospital, Oslo (Norway)
Sebastien Gouy
Gynecologic oncologist
Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif

(France) Université Paris Saclay, Paris (France)
ESGO would like to thank the members of the international development group for
their constant availability, work, and for making possible the development of these
guidelines for the fertility-sparing treatment and follow-up in patients with cervical
cancer, ovarian cancer, and borderline ovarian tumours (see below). ESGO is also very
grateful to the 121 international external reviewers for their participation (list available
on the ESGO website).



---
[PAGE 7/28]

7
NAME
SPECIALTY
AFFILIATION
Philipp Harter
Gynecologic oncologist
Kliniken Essen Mitte, Essen (Germany)
Xavier Matias-Guiu
Pathologist
Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova,

Lleida (Spain)
George Pados
Obstetrician & gynecologist
Papageorgiou General Hospital,

School of Medicine, Aristotle University

of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki (Greece)
Maja Pakiz
Gynecologic oncologist
University Medical Center Maribor, Maribor

(Slovenia)
Denis Querleu
Gynecologic oncologist
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A Gemelli

IRCCS, Rome (Italy)
Alexandros Rodolakis
Gynecologic oncologist
Alexandra Hospital, National and Kapodistrian

University of Athens, Athens (Greece)
Christine Rousset-Jablonski	 Medical oncologist
Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon (France)

Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Bron (France)
Artem Stepanyan
Gynecologic oncologist
Nairi Medical Center, Yerevan (Armenia)
Antonia Carla Testa
Gynecologic oncologist
Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A Gemelli

IRCCS, Rome (Italy)
Kirsten Tryde Macklon
Onco-fertility specialist
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen

(Denmark)
Dimitrios Tsolakidis
Obstetrician & gynecologist
Papageorgiou General Hospital,

School of Medicine, Aristotle University

of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki (Greece)
Michel De Vos
Reproductive medicine specialist	 Centre for Reproductive Medicine, University

Hospital Brussels, Brussels (Belgium)

Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels (Belgium)



---
[PAGE 8/28]

8
TABLE OF CONTENTS
General recommendations ..................................................................... 10
Oncologic aspects of fertility-sparing strategies during
the initial management of cervical cancer ............................................ 12
Oncologic selection criteria...................................................................... 12
Methods to assess the criteria ................................................................. 12
Surgical and pathological criteria............................................................. 12
Favourable oncologic selection criteria..................................................... 13
Unfavourable oncologic selection criteria................................................. 14
Oncologic selection criteria acceptable in selected cases ......................... 14
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for selected patients
with stage IB2 cervical cancer ................................................................. 15
Oncologic aspects of fertility-sparing strategies
during the initial management of ovarian cancer ............................... 15
General recommendation........................................................................ 15
Oncologic selection criteria (see Table 1) ................................................. 15
Favourable oncologic selection criteria for ovarian preservation................ 15
Unfavourable oncologic selection criteria for ovarian preservation............ 16
Oncologic selection criteria acceptable in selected cases ......................... 16
Salpingo-oophorectomy vs. cystectomy in selected cases
of borderline ovarian tumours................................................................. 18
Optimisation of fertility results and infertility management ............. 18
Reproductive medicine specialist consultation.......................................... 18
Reproductive medicine specialist consultation in patients
with ovarian cancer and high-risk genetic predisposition.......................... 18
Evaluating ovarian function in patients before cancer treatment? ........... 19
Fertility preservation methods in first line treatment settings ..................  19
Ovarian tumours ..................................................................................... 19



---
[PAGE 9/28]

9
Cevical cancers ....................................................................................... 20
Fertility preservation methods in case of recurrence................................. 20
Evaluating ovarian function....................................................................  21
What should be offered to patients after treatment? .............................  21
Desire for immediate pregnancy ............................................................. 21
No immediate pregnancy desired ............................................................ 21
Oocyte vitrification ................................................................................. 22
Desire for a pregnancy and beyond ...................................................... 22
When should oncological authorisation be granted? ............................... 22
Cervical cancer........................................................................................ 23
Frequencies of follow-up after fertility-sparing management ................... 23
Follow-up procedures after fertility-sparing management........................ 23
Specific requirements for the follow-up during the pregnancy
and maternal surveillance........................................................................ 23
Need for completion surgery after childbearing ...................................... 24
Indication and modalities for hormone replacement therapy
after completion surgery  or bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
plus uterine preservation ........................................................................ 24
Ovarian cancer ....................................................................................... 24
Frequencies of follow-up after fertility-sparing management.................... 24
Surveillance during pregnancy ................................................................ 25
Need for a completion surgery after childbearing .................................... 25
Indications and modalities for hormone replacement therapy
after completion surgery or bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
plus uterine preservation ........................................................................ 25




---
[PAGE 10/28]

10
General recommendations
Counselling with a reproductive specialist who has an in-depth understan-
ding of the patient and couple’s history is recommended before considering
fertility-sparing treatment and pregnancy seeking
The aim of fertility-sparing surgery is to enable patients to have unassisted
or assisted pregnancies with their uterus and their own or donated oocytes.
Fertility-sparing surgery and treatment planning should be performed
exclusively by teams with a strong collaboration between gynaecological
oncologists and reproductive medicine specialists.
Pathological expert review is recommended in all patients if the diagnosis
and associated treatment could impair fertility.
Detailed description of the initial surgery should be provided (endobag,
upper abdomen description, etc).
A
A
A
A
A
The main steps for the selection of patients with cervical cancer for considering fertility-
-sparing treatment are described in figure 1.



---
[PAGE 11/28]

11
Figure 1
Selection of patients with cervical cancer for fertility-sparing
treatment
Fertility-sparing treatment
Desirous of future fertility
YES
YES
NO
Squamous cell carcinomas or HPV associated usual
type adenocarcinomas
Radiological1 and
surgical LN staging
Fertility-sparing treatment
cannot be recommended
Negative LN
Tumour size
Fertility-sparing treatment cannot
be performed or recommended
≤2 cm
>4 cm
2-4 cm
Suitable candidate
for fertility-sparing
treatment
Fertility-sparing treatment
can be considered in
selected cases2
Fertility-sparing treatment
cannot be considered
a standard treatment2
YES
NO
LN lymph node
1 Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (preferred, evaluated by a dedicated gynaecological radiolo-
gist) and/or expert sonography are mandatory imaging tests. Radiological assessment by computed
tomography or positron emission tomography/computed tomography could be performed to
exclude any distant metastatic disease;
2 Pelvic lymph node staging (sentinel lymph node) should always be the first step in each
fertility-sparing therapy procedure (except for T1a1 lymphovascular space involvement negative
disease). All sentinel lymph nodes from both sides of the pelvis and any suspicious LN should
be sent for frozen section. If sentinel lymph node cannot be detected on either pelvic side,
a systematic pelvic lymphadenectomy should be performed on that side. Intraoperative
assessment of LN status is highly recommended.



---
[PAGE 12/28]

12
Oncologic selection criteria
Oncologic aspects of fertility-sparing strategies during the initial
management of cervical cancer
Methods to assess the criteria
The mandatory imaging tests to assess oncological criteria are pelvic mag-
netic resonance (MRI) (preferred; evaluated by a dedicated gynaecological
radiologist) or expert sonography. The following information is required:
tumour size, depth of stromal invasion, distance between cranial edge of
tumour and internal cervical orifice, and any extra cervical extension or suspi-
cious nodes.
Radiological assessment by computed tomography (CT) or positron emis-
sion tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) could be performed to
exclude any distant metastatic disease.
Cervical conisation is the method of choice for staging in early cervical can-
cer and could be associated with lymph node staging according to the
ESGO-ESTRO-ESP guidelines.
Conisation should be performed if no gross lesion is noted.
A
B
B
B
Surgical and pathological criteria
Radical trachelectomy with removal of a part of parametria is not recom-
mended for stage IB1 disease fulfilling all the strict inclusion criteria of the
ConCerv trial (ie, stage IA2-IB1 as defined by the 2009 FIGO staging system,
squamous cell at any grade or adenocarcinoma at grade 1 or 2, tumour
size ≤2 cm, no lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI), negative imaging for
metastatic disease, depth of invasion ≤10 mm, and conisation margins and
endocervical curettage negative for malignancy or high-grade dysplasia.
Radical trachelectomy is recommended for stage IB2 disease by use of an
abdominal approach (eg, laparotomy or mini-invasive approaches [robotic-
-assisted or pure laparoscopic approaches]).
Lymph node staging strategies for stage IB1 and IB2 diseases should follow
the ESGO-ESTRO-ESP guidelines.
Negative margins (a non-fragmented specimen, with at least 1 mm histolo-
gical-free margin from carcinoma or dysplasia) are mandatory.
E
B
B
A



---
[PAGE 13/28]

13
A non-fragmented cone is crucial for pathological evaluation. The base of
the cone should encompass the visible gross lesion on the ectocervix with at
least 1 mm histological margin. The height of the cone (centre of cone base
to vertex) should be at least 10 mm. Cones can be oriented with a suture at
the midpoint of the anterior cervical lip (also called the 12 o’clock suture).
A negative endocervical biopsy or curettage above the conisation or trache-
lectomy is required.
Pathologists are encouraged to assign a Silva pattern classification for hu-
man papillomavirus (HPV)-associated usual-type adenocarcinoma tumours
(pattern A is the most favourable; pattern B without LVSI is also favourable).
Negative pelvic nodal status is mandatory for any fertility-sparing therapy.
For assessing the pelvic nodal staging, ESGO-ESTRO-ESP guidelines should
be followed.
Pelvic nodal staging is not indicated in T1a1 LVSI-negative tumours that
have negative margins on conisation.
Intraoperative frozen section of cone margins can be considered to tailor
the surgery.
B
C
D
B
B
A
Favourable oncologic selection criteria
The following seven criteria should be met before considering fertility-spa-
ring management:
•	 Assignment of patients to favourable selection criteria is based on all

clinicopathological variables;
•	 Confirmed histology on cervical biopsy or conisation is consistent with

squamous cell carcinoma (all grades) or usual-type HPV-associated ade-

nocarcinoma (all grades) with no more than 10 mm stromal invasion;
•	 Absence of LVSI is a favourable pathological biomarker;
•	 No evidence of any metastasis is required;
•	 Largest measurement of a tumour is 2 cm by imaging or clinical exam;
•	 Free margins on final pathology are mandatory;
•	 No evidence of tumour involvement of the internal cervical orifice and

cranial extent of cervical tumour is 1 cm or more from the internal cervi-

cal orifice on imaging.
B
B
B
B
A
A
B



---
[PAGE 14/28]

14
Unfavourable oncologic selection criteria
At least one of the following criteria should be met:
•	 Any histological type other than squamous cell carcinoma and usual-type

HPV-associated adenocarcinoma (mucinous-type HPV-associated carci-

nomas, gastric-type cervical adenocarcinoma, mesonephric carcinoma,

small-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, and clear cell carcinoma;
•	 Confirmed pelvic nodal involvement, extracervical tumour extension,

evidence of tumour beyond the cervical ring, or metastasis;
•	 The largest tumour measurement is more than 4 cm by imaging or clinical

exam;
•	 FIGO stage is IB3 or more;
•	 Tumour cranial extent is less than 5 mm from, or involves, the internal

cervical orifice or lower uterine segment by imaging;
•	 Intraoperative frozen-section assessment of the resected cervical spe-

cimen for assessing the upper resection margin reveals a positive margin

from the internal cervical orifice with inability to achieve a wider margin;
•	 Histologically confirmed endocervical margin, endocervical curettage

above resection, or endometrial involvement on final pathology.
C
B
B
B
B
B
B
Oncologic selection criteria acceptable in selected cases
At least one of the following criteria should be met:
•	 Tumour size is 2-4 cm by exam or imaging;
•	 Stromal invasion by conisation is more than 10 mm but has negative mar-

gins;
•	 Evidence of deep cervical stromal invasion on MRI or sonography;
•	 Tumour cranial extent is 5–10 mm from internal cervical orifice by imaging;
•	 Trachelectomy specimen margin reveals a 5–10 mm tumour-free margin

from the internal cervical orifice;
•	 Silva pattern C of HPV-associated usual-type adenocarcinoma (data are

scarce on pattern B with LVSI).
C
C
B
B
C
C



---
[PAGE 15/28]

15
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for selected patients with stage IB2
cervical cancer
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has been used by various investigators as an
alternative to radical trachelectomy for selected patients with stage IB2 (2-4
cm) cervical cancer.
Various chemotherapy regimens have been used to reduce cervical tumour
burden and allow for a satisfactory resection of the primary tumour with
conisation and simple or radical trachelectomy.
Retrospective data suggest that abdominal radical trachelectomy has the
lowest recurrence rate for patients with stage IB2 cervical cancer.
Ongoing prospective trials with platinum and paclitaxel will clarify the va-
lidity of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in fertility-sparing treatment of stage
IB2 disease.
Including patients with stage IB2 cervical cancer in ongoing trials is encou-
raged to evaluate the safety of neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Confirming pathological-negative bilateral pelvic nodes (sentinel lymph
node or lymphadenectomy) before starting neoadjuvant chemotherapy
allows for the most accurate staging and selection of appropriate candida-
tes for neoadjuvant chemotherapy approach.
Preoperative imaging with pelvic MRI and whole-body PET-CT is favoured.
C
C
C
C
B
B
B
General recommendation
Oncologic aspects of fertility-sparing strategies during the initial
management of ovarian cancer
If bilateral oophorectomy is needed, uterine-sparing surgery can be consi-
dered assuming normal endometrial (preferably evaluated by hysteroscopy)
and serosal evaluation.
B
Oncologic selection criteria (see Table 1)
Favourable oncologic selection criteria for ovarian preservation
One of the following criteria should be met:
•	 Borderline ovarian tumour all stages (non-invasive peritoneal implants)

regardless of ovarian micro invasion;
•	 Germ cell tumours (all stages);
B



---
[PAGE 16/28]

16
•	 Granulosa cell tumours stage IA and IC1;
•	 Sertoli-Leydig cell well-and-moderately differentiated tumours stage IA;
•	 Low-grade serous and low grade endometrioid carcinomas stage IA and IC1;
•	 High-grade serous carcinoma stage IA;
•	 Mucinous carcinoma expansile subtype stage IA and IC1;
•	 Mucinous carcinoma infiltrative stage IA;
•	 Clear-cell carcinoma stage IA and IC1.
B
Unfavourable oncologic selection criteria for ovarian preservation
One of the following criteria should be met:
•	 Invasive epithelial ovarian tumours stage IB and II–IV;
•	 Low-grade serous carcinoma stage IC3;
•	 Low-grade endometrioid carcinoma stage IC3;
•	 High-grade serous and high-grade endometrioid carcinomas stage IC3;
•	 Clear cell carcinoma stage IC3;
•	 Mucinous carcinoma infiltrative stage IC3;
•	 Small-cell carcinoma hyper calcaemic type;
•	 Granulosa cell tumour stage IB and II–IV;
•	 Sertoli-Leydig cell tumours well-and-moderately differentiated at stages

IB and IC2–IV, and poorly differentiated at all stages.
B
Oncologic selection criteria acceptable in selected cases
One of the following criteria should be met:
•	 Low-grade serous and low-grade endometrioid carcinomas stage IC2;
•	 Mucinous carcinoma expansile subtype stage IC3;
•	 Clear cell carcinoma stage IC2;
•	 High grade serous and high-grade endometrioid carcinomas stage IC2;
•	 Mucinous carcinoma infiltrative stage IC1 and IC2;
•	 Granulosa cell tumour stage IC2 and IC3;
•	 Sertoli Leydig cell tumours, well differentiated and moderately differen-

tiated at stages IB and IC1;
•	 Tubo-ovarian carcinoma (unilateral) or serous tubal intraepithelial

carcinoma in patients younger than 40 years with high-risk predisposition

germline mutation.
C



---
[PAGE 17/28]

17
Table 1
Indications for in vivo ovarian tissue preservation in ovarian
neoplasms according to the histological type and the stage
of the disease
STAGE
EPITHELIAL OVARIAN NEOPLASMS
NON-EPITHELIAL OVARIAN NEOPLASMS
BOT1
LGSC
LGEC
MCexp
CCC
HGSC
HGEC
MCinf
GCT2
SCC
GrCT
SLCT3
SLCT4
IA
IB
IC1
IC2
##
IC3
##
II-IV
#

favourable oncologic selection criteria for fertility-sparing management as defined in
the text (based on the favourable survival and/or recurrence rates observed in cohorts and/
or comparative studies (radical versus conservative) of patients treated with such characteris-
tics).

oncologic selection criteria acceptable in selected cases (insufficient or conflicting data
to evaluate accurately the results of the ovarian preservation in this subgroup of patients).

unfavourable oncologic selection criteria for ovarian preservation (poorest survival
observed in patients having an ovarian preservation in these subgroups. It could be related
to the use of ovarian preservation itself and/or the natural history of the disease (whatever
the preservation or not of the ovary) in these patients having poorest prognostic factors).
1non-invasive peritoneal implants; 2including immature teratoma, dysgerminoma, Yolk-sac
tumours; 3well and moderately differentiated; 4poorly differentiated; #for grade 2-3 imma-
ture teratoma stage II-IV, fertility-sparing data are limited; ## for Sertoli-Leydig cell tumour
stage IC2-3, fertility-sparing data are limited.
BOT borderline ovarian tumour; CCC clear cell carcinoma; GCT germ cell tumour; GrCT
granulosa cell tumour; HGEC high-grade endometrioid carcinoma; HGSC high-grade serous
carcinoma; LGSC low-grade serous carcinoma; LGEC low-grade endometrioid carcinoma,
MCexp mucinous carcinoma with expansile invasion, MCinf mucinous carcinoma with in-
filtrative invasion; SCC small cell carcinoma; SLCT Sertoli-Leydig cell tumour.



---
[PAGE 18/28]

18
Salpingo-oophorectomy vs. cystectomy in selected cases of borderline
ovarian tumours
Bilateral ovarian cystectomy with macroscopic healthy ovarian tissue spa-
ring in bilateral serous and seromucinous borderline ovarian tumours can
be considered.
Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and cystectomy with macroscopic
healthy ovarian tissue sparing are both acceptable strategies for unilateral
serous and seromucinous borderline ovarian tumour. In case of cystectomy,
patients should be counselled about the risk of local and ovarian recurrence
of up to 30% with no effect on overall survival, but better fertility results.
B
B
Reproductive medicine specialist consultation
Optimisation of fertility results and infertility management
Individuals who wish to preserve their fertility should be offered repro-
ductive counselling before the beginning of any oncological treatment.
The reproductive medicine specialist should be part of the treatment decisi-
on process and be consulted when treatment plans are changing or family
planning starts. Creation of a specific multidisciplinary team is encouraged.
B
A
Reproductive medicine specialist consultation in patients with ovarian
cancer and high-risk genetic predisposition
Patients who carry a high-risk genetic predisposition for ovarian cancer
should have similar fertility preservation counselling compared with non-
-carriers (see Table 1), including the information about transmission to the
offspring.
If fertility preservation is considered, ovarian stimulation followed by oocyte
or embryo cryopreservation is the treatment of choice in patients who carry
a high-risk genetic predisposition as it does not increase the individual risk
of developing new hormone-dependent cancers.
There are no data on oncological safety of ovarian tissue reimplantation in
patients who carry a high-risk genetic predisposition, but cryopreservation
of ovarian tissue might be considered.
After completion of family planning or at the recommended time of pelvic
prophylactic surgery, salpingo-oophorectomy, with or without hysterecto-
my, should be performed in patients who carry a high-risk genetic predis-
position.
Patients who carry a high-risk genetic predisposition could be referred for
preconception and preimplantation genetic-testing counselling.
A
B
C
B
C



---
[PAGE 19/28]

19
Evaluating ovarian function in patients before cancer treatment
The assessment of ovarian reserve should be done with the same methods
as in women without cancer (eg, serum anti-Müllerian hormone and antral
follicle count), although the interpretation of results might be difficult in
patients with ovarian tumours.
The age of the patient is more important than anti-Müllerian hormone and
antral follicle count in planning fertility-sparing treatment. Pretreatment
ovarian reserve markers alone should not be used as treatment guide for
fertility-sparing surgery.
B
D
Fertility preservation methods in first-line treatment settings
Ovarian tumours
Ovarian stimulation followed by egg retrieval can be offered to patients
with ovarian cancer with favourable prognostic factors considering histolo-
gical diagnosis, hormone sensitivity, cancer stage, and oncological progno-
sis (see Table 1).
Ovarian stimulation followed by egg retrieval for fertility preservation is not
recommended before final histological confirmation of a possibly malignant
or borderline ovarian mass.
For primary ovarian neoplasms, it is recommended that ovarian stimulation
and oocyte cryopreservation be performed after completing staging surge-
ry and determining the histological diagnosis, hormone sensitivity, cancer
stage, and oncological prognosis (see Table 1).
Ovarian tissue freezing and immature oocytes retrieval for ex vivo in vitro
maturation and further mature oocyte vitrification during surgery in case of
bilateral oophorectomy could be offered.
Ovarian stimulation followed by oocyte retrieval is not contraindicated in
patients previously treated for stage I ovarian borderline tumours, even in
cases of abnormal-appearing residual ovary that will be subjected to stimu-
lation.
Ovarian stimulation followed by oocyte retrieval (even in cases of abnormal-
-appearing residual ovary) is not contraindicated in patients with advanced
stage borderline ovarian tumours, as long as there has been a complete
resection and pathological evaluation (confirming non-invasive implants) of
visible peritoneal lesions.
The timing of ovarian stimulation and egg retrieval when adjuvant chemo-
therapy for ovarian cancer is planned depends on multidisciplinary discus-
sion and can be performed ideally before chemotherapy or in rescue at least
6 months after chemotherapy (post-treatment fertility preservation).
C
B
D
B
D
C
D



---
[PAGE 20/28]

20
In cases of borderline ovarian tumour, biomarkers of the tumour (BRAF,
oestrogen receptor, KRAS, etc) should not be used as a contraindication for
considering ovarian stimulation (indication and protocol).
In cases of low-grade serous or ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinoma or
granulosa cell tumour, the ovarian stimulation protocol based on co-treat-
ment with aromatase inhibitors should be a first choice (see Table 1).
D
B
Cervical cancers
For all patients with cervical cancer eligible for fertility-sparing manage-
ment, ovarian stimulation followed by oocyte retrieval can be discussed
for women without ovarian involvement treated by radiotherapy, brachy-
therapy, or hysterectomy in accordance with the legal country-specific regu-
lations regarding surrogate pregnancy.
Special attention is needed for ovarian stimulations and transvaginal oocyte
retrieval in the presence of active cervical neoplasia. Transvaginal punctu-
re and retrieval might be possible in selected cases with minimal tumour
involvement. However, it should be avoided in cases with extensive upper
vaginal disease to minimise the theoretical risk of iatrogenic cancer spread
during the procedure. A transabdominal laparoscopic approach or open
approach might be an option. Transabdominal approach for oocyte retrieval
has been suggested as a safe and efficacious procedure.
C
C
Fertility preservation methods in case of recurrence
Fertility evaluation for patients with apparent recurrent, borderline ovarian
tumours who wish to preserve their fertility is mandatory before any tre-
atment in gynaecological oncology centres with comprehensive multidis-
ciplinary expertise within a multidisciplinary team, including a reproductive
medicine specialist.
Ovarian stimulation followed by oocyte retrieval in cases of recurrent stage I
borderline ovarian tumour with no evidence of peritoneal disease is feasible
before potential definitive surgery.
Ovarian stimulation followed by oocyte retrieval in cases of recurrent advan-
ced stage borderline ovarian tumour is feasible as long as there has been
a complete resection and pathological evaluation (confirming non-invasive
implants) of visible peritoneal lesions and normal-appearing abdominopel-
vic imaging (CT or MRI scan) suggesting the absence of obvious implants
before the eventual stimulation.
A
C
C



---
[PAGE 21/28]

21
For malignant germ cell tumours, fertility preservation strategy should be
discussed on an individual basis in a multidisciplinary team for women pre-
viously treated for an immature teratoma and presenting a recurrence high-
ly suspicious of benign teratoma or growing teratoma syndrome.
In cases of a suspected recurrence of sex cord tumours, fertility preservation
strategies should not be considered.
B
D
Evaluating ovarian function
It is important to recognise the limitations of serum anti Müllerian hormone
concentrations and antral follicle count as predictors of pregnancy, either
through natural conception or after assisted reproductive technology (ART).
Regular measurement of serum anti-Müllerian hormone concentrations
after cancer treatment can be used to indirectly estimate the degree and
evolution of the ovarian follicular pool and ovarian response to stimulation.
B
C
What should be offered to patients after treatment?
Desire for immediate pregnancy
If fertility-sparing surgery did not affect the possibility of unassisted concep-
tion, patients are advised to attempt spontaneous conception for at least
6 months before being referred to a reproductive medicine specialist. Pa-
tients with a history of infertility or inability to conceive spontaneously
should be referred to a reproductive medicine specialist as soon as possible.
B
No immediate pregnancy desired
Patients treated for ovarian tumours could be referred to a reproductive
medicine specialist for counselling.
In case of a previous history of infertility or inability of natural conception
due to surgery, patients should be referred to a reproductive medicine spe-
cialist to discuss oocyte or embryo freezing.
Patients who underwent fertility-sparing surgery for borderline ovarian
tumours, including those with micropapillary or microinvasive features
(who still have at least one ovary), should be advised about the availability
of reproductive medicine specialists and referred as needed (see Table 1).
Patients who underwent fertility-sparing surgery for ovarian cancer (who still
have at least one ovary) and are considered to have a favourable oncological
prognosis should be advised about the availability of reproductive medicine
specialists and referred if applicable, taking into account histological dia-
gnosis, hormone sensitivity, stage, and oncological prognosis (see Table 1).
C
B
B
B



---
[PAGE 22/28]

22
Oocyte vitrification
When oocyte vitrification is considered after fertility-sparing surgery alone,
ovarian reserve assessment should be performed at least 6 months after
surgery to allow recovery.
When oocyte vitrification is considered after chemotherapy, ovarian re-
serve assessment should be performed after at least 6 months.
B
B
When should oncological authorisation be granted?
Desire for a pregnancy and beyond
A
C
All patients with borderline ovarian, epithelial, or non-epithelial tumours
should be advised according to the age of the patient, stage of disease,
pathology, unilateral or bilateral localisation of the tumour, and mode of
surgery (eg, cystectomy vs oophorectomy).
Patients with cervical cancer treated with any kind of surgery (eg, trache-
lectomy or conisation) are advised not to attempt pregnancy within the
first 6 months after surgery.
Spontaneous pregnancies can be encouraged in patients with a borderline
ovarian tumour immediately after the fertility-sparing surgery.
Patients needing fertility treatment can be referred for ART in cases of
a low-stage borderline ovarian tumour immediately after fertility-sparing
surgery.
Patients needing fertility treatment can be referred for ART in cases of
advanced-stage borderline ovarian tumour after complete resection and ab-
sence of invasiveness of implants immediately after fertility-sparing surgery.
Patients with a borderline ovarian tumour at high risk of relapse could be
referred immediately after fertility-sparing surgery for oocyte or embryo
cryopreservation.
Patients with epithelial ovarian cancer might be advised to become preg-
nant 1 year after the completion of treatment with negative follow-up.
Patients with non-epithelial, early-stage ovarian cancer might be advised
to become pregnant after the first 6 months of a negative follow-up after
the fertility-sparing procedure.
For patients with non-epithelial ovarian cancer needing fertility treatment,
ART can be performed after the first 6 months of a negative follow-up
after the fertility-sparing procedure.
Regardless of cancer type, patients should be advised that they are not
limited to one pregnancy.
B
B
B
C
C
C
C
A



---
[PAGE 23/28]

23
Cervical cancer
Frequencies of follow-up after fertility-sparing management
Follow-up is the same as for any patient with cervical cancer; namely, every
3–4 months for 2 years, every 6 months for another 3–5 years, and then
annually.
Reduction of frequency of follow-up could be proposed in cases of negative
HPV testing after conservative surgery.
B
C
Follow-up procedures after fertility-sparing management
Physical examination should be performed, including bimanual pelvic exa-
mination every 3-4 months for the first 2 years, every 6 months thereafter
until the fifth year, and then annually. Cytology plus HPV testing should be
performed after 6 months, then annually.
Colposcopy should be performed in cases of abnormalities at cytology and
a biopsy sample should be taken for positive results from HPV testing.
HPV vaccination should be encouraged.
MRI (preferably evaluated by a dedicated gynaecological radiologist) is
mandatory at 6 months and 12 months, and then when clinically indicated
thereafter.
Transvaginal ultrasonography, with or without transrectal ultrasonography,
is an option when performed by an experienced sonographer.
PET-CT can be considered in cases of suspicion of a recurrence.
There is no evidence to recommend the routine use of squamous cell carci-
noma antigen in follow-up.
B
B
C
C
B
A
B
Specific requirements for the follow-up during the pregnancy and
maternal surveillance
A surgery requiring a large cervical excision should be accompanied by a
permanent cerclage.
Progesterone supplementation in pregnancy after fertility-sparing surgery
for cervical cancer is recommended to prevent preterm birth.
Patients with and without a permanent cerclage should be assessed for
cervical incompetence during pregnancy by an experienced obstetrician.
Patients treated only with a large or repeat conisation should be evaluated
for cervical incompetence or competence by an experienced obstetrician.
B
B
B
B



---
[PAGE 24/28]

24
MRI can be performed when clinically relevant.
Follow-up visit consists of a physical examination and cytology plus HPV
testing (co-testing) in early pregnancy unless it was performed within the
last year.
Colposcopy should be performed when indicated from cytology or HPV
testing and from clinical implications.
Transvaginal ultrasonography, with or without transrectal ultrasonography,
should be performed by an experienced sonographer when clinically indi-
cated.
Elective caesarean section should be considered for delivery in patients with
history of invasive cervical cancer.
Breastfeeding is recommended, as in the general population, and should
not be discouraged.
B
B
A
B
B
B
Need for completion surgery after childbearing
Completion surgery after childbearing with no evidence of disease is not
recommended.
Hysterectomy should be offered only in cases where follow-up is not feasib-
le (cervical stenosis and patient incompliance) and in cases of persistent,
high-risk, HPV-positive test results.
B
D
Indication and modalities for hormone replacement therapy after
completion surgery or bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy plus uterine
preservation
Patients with premature ovarian insufficiency after treatment of squamous
cell cervical cancer can be offered hormone replacement therapy after dis-
cussing risks and benefits.
In patients with adenocarcinoma positive for oestrogen receptors, hormo-
ne replacement therapy could be offered on an individual basis after tho-
rough discussion.
C
C
Ovarian cancer
Frequencies of follow-up after fertility-sparing management
Follow-up is recommended every 3–4 months for 2 years, every 6 months
for another 3–5 years, and then annually for at least 10 years.
Follow-up should consist of physical examination and ultrasound examina-
tion by an experienced ultrasonographer.
B
B



---
[PAGE 25/28]

25
Pelvic and abdominal CT or MRI should be performed at 6 months and then
annually until the fifth year.
Measurement of cancer antigen-125 concentration or other tumour mar-
kers according to histotype (ie, inhibin B, anti-Müllerian hormone for sex
cord stromal tumours, β-human chorionic gonadotrophin, α-fetoprotein, or
lactate dehydrogenase for germ cell tumours) is only recommended when
initially elevated or when presurgical markers are missing.
PET-CT is only indicated in cases of suspicion of recurrence.
B
B
B
Surveillance during pregnancy
Transvaginal and abdominal ultrasonography should be performed by an
experienced sonographer in early first and second trimester of pregnancy.
Follow-up of tumour markers is not recommended during pregnancy.
Breastfeeding is recommended as in the general population and should not
be discouraged.
B
B
D
Need for a completion surgery after childbearing
Routine completion surgery (removal of remaining ovary and tube) is not
recommended in patients with borderline ovarian tumours.
Routine completion surgery is recommended in patients with a family his-
tory of genetic high-risk epithelial ovarian tumours.
Routine completion surgery could be considered on a case-by-case basis in
patients with epithelial ovarian tumours.
Routine completion surgery is not recommended in patients with germ cell
tumours.
In all other non-epithelial tumours, routine completion surgery could be
offered on a case-by-case basis.
In patients with granulosa cell tumours, additional hysterectomy must be
considered.
D
B
C
D
C
B
Indications and modalities for hormone replacement therapy after
completion surgery or bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy plus uterine
preservation
Hormone replacement therapy can be offered after completion surgery to
patients with borderline ovarian tumours and ovarian cancer after discuss-
ing risks and benefits and taking into account their histological subtype.
B



---
[PAGE 26/28]

26
NOTES



---
[PAGE 27/28]

27
Access full ESGO Guidelines: www.esgo.org/explore/guidelines
© 2025 European Society of Gynaecological Oncology
All rights reserved. No part of this book can be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted or utilised in any
form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without
written permissions of ESGO. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and
information, but the authors and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all mate-
rials or for the consequences of their use, and the ultimate responsibility rests with the prescribing
physician.



---
[PAGE 28/28]

© 2025 European Society of Gynaecological Oncology. All rights reserved.
European Society of Gynaecological Oncology
Avenue Emmanuel Mounier, 83/11
1200 Brussels, Belgium
Email: adminoffice@esgomail.org
www.esgo.org

