# ESMO_CPG_EpithelialOvarian_2023


---
[PAGE 1/16]

SPECIAL ARTICLE
Newly diagnosed and relapsed epithelial ovarian cancer: ESMO Clinical
Practice Guideline for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up5
A. González-Martín1, P. Harter2, A. Leary3, D. Lorusso4,5, R. E. Miller6,7, B. Pothuri8, I. Ray-Coquard9, D. S. P. Tan10,11,12,13,
E. Bellet14, A. Oaknin15 & J. A. Ledermann16, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee
1Department of Medical Oncology and Program in Solid Tumors Cima-Universidad de Navarra, Cancer Center Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Madrid and Pamplona,
Spain; 2Department of Gynecology and Gynecologic Oncology, Ev. Kliniken Essen-Mitte, Essen, Germany; 3Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer
Center, INSERM U981, Université Paris-Saclay, Paris, France; 4Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli IRCSS, Rome;
5Department of Woman, Child and Public Health, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy; 6Department of Medical Oncology, University College Hospital,
London; 7Department of Medical Oncology, St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, UK; 8Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU
Langone Health, New York University School of Medicine, New York, USA; 9Department of Medical Oncology, Centre Leon Bernard and Université Claude Bernard Lyon
I, Lyon, France; 10Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore; 11National University of Singapore (NUS)
Centre for Cancer Research, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore; 12Cancer Science Institute, National University of Singapore,
Singapore; 13Department of Haematology-Oncology, National University Cancer Institute, National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore; 14ACTOdAlleanza contro
il Tumore Ovarico, Milan, Italy; 15Gynaecologic Cancer Programme, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Vall d’Hebron
Barcelona Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain; 16Department of Oncology, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, UK
Available online 17 August 2023
Key words: epithelial ovarian cancer, guideline, diagnosis, surgery, treatment, follow-up
INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) represents a heterogeneous
spectrum of disease entities at a clinical, pathological and
molecular level. Ovarian cancer is the second most lethal
gynaecological malignancy worldwide behind cervical can-
cer and the ﬁrst in developed countries, with w200 000
women dying globally in 2020.1 A study of epidemiological
trends from 1990 to 2019 showed that highly developed
regions had the highest burden and mortality.2
Infertility or nulliparity, estrogen hormone treatment and
obesity have been reported as risk factors for EOC and
could account for the rising incidence of the disease in
developed countries.3 Oral contraceptive use, especially
over longer periods, and breastfeeding can reduce inci-
dence.4 A recent large study revealed signiﬁcant heteroge-
neity of associations for 14 EOC risk factors across
histological subtypes.3 Higher
parity, younger age
at
menopause and tubal ligation were most strongly associ-
ated with reduced risk in endometrioid carcinomas (ECs)
and clear-cell carcinomas (CCCs), while endometriosis was
associated with an increased risk in both EOC subtypes.3
Serous and poorly differentiated carcinomas had modest
associations with parity and menopausal hormonal therapy
use and stronger associations with a family history of
ovarian cancer.3 Deleterious germline BRCA1/2 mutations
(gBRCA1/2-muts) are associated with a 16%-65% increased
risk of EOC, predominantly of high-grade serous histology.5
Women with mutations in mismatch repair genes (Lynch
syndrome) have a 10%-12% lifetime risk of developing EOC,
which tends to be of either EC or CCC subtype.6
DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Diagnostic work-up
There is currently no reliable screening method for ovarian
cancer. Most women are diagnosed based on symptoms,
with the majority presenting at an advanced stage. Recog-
nised
symptoms
include
abdominal/pelvic
pain,
con-
stipation, diarrhoea, urinary frequency, vaginal bleeding,
abdominal distension and fatigue. In advanced disease,
ascites and abdominal masses lead to bloating, nausea,
anorexia, dyspepsia and early satiety. Extension of disease
into the pleural cavities can produce effusions and respi-
ratory symptoms.
The standard work-up for patients suspected of having
EOC should include detailed history and clinical examination
with relevant laboratory and imaging tests (Table 1). Mea-
surement of serum cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) aids diag-
nosis and is elevated in w85% of patients with advanced
disease. CA-125 is less useful in early-stage disease, as it is
*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via
Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
5Note: Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: April 2002, last
update July 2023. This publication supersedes the previously published
versiondAnn Oncol. 2013;24(suppl 6):vi24-vi32.
0923-7534/© 2023 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
833



---
[PAGE 2/16]

only elevated in w50% of International Federation of
Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage I cases. Elevated
CA-125 is not speciﬁc to ovarian cancer and may be
elevated in non-gynaecological malignancies and benign
conditions (e.g. endometriosis and ovarian cysts).7
Measuring serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and
carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels in addition to CA-125 may
help distinguish primary mucinous ovarian tumours from a
gastrointestinal metastasis. In this scenario, endoscopies
should be considered, especially if the CA-125/CEA ratio is
25/1.8
Initial imaging should comprise pelvic ultrasound (US;
transabdominal and/or transvaginal) and computed to-
mography (CT) of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis to com-
plete clinical staging and aid surgical planning. US-based
diagnostic models [International Ovarian Tumor Analysis
(IOTA) Simple Rules risk model or IOTA Assessment of
Different NEoplasias in the adneXa (ADNEX) model] are
preferable to CA-125, the human epididymis protein 4 (HE4)
or the Risk of Ovarian Malignancy Algorithm, as they are
superior in distinguishing between benign and malignant
ovarian tumours and performed better than the Risk of
Malignancy Index in a randomised controlled trial (RCT).8
A deﬁnitive diagnosis of ovarian cancer requires patho-
logical examination by an expert pathologist of tumour
samples from either a diagnostic biopsy or, preferably, a
surgical specimen. An adequate amount of tissue, particu-
larly if neoadjuvant chemotherapy (ChT) is planned, allows
genetic tumour testing for therapeutic stratiﬁcation. If a
complete pathological response is achieved, sufﬁcient
viable tumour tissue may be unavailable for genetic testing
following interval cytoreductive surgery (ICS). Cytological
assessment of ascites (in early-stage disease) and of pleural
ﬂuid (if present and safely assessable) is required to com-
plete staging.
Pathology and molecular biology
EOC represents the majority (w90%) of ovarian malignancies.
The 2020 World Health Organization (WHO) classiﬁcation
based on histopathology, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
molecular analysis recognises at least ﬁve distinct subtypes of
malignant EOC: high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC; 70% of
cases), EC (10%), CCC (6%-10%), low-grade serous carcinoma
(LGSC; 5%) and mucinous carcinoma (MC; 3%-4%), along with
other rare entities including mesonephric-like carcinoma,
mixed-cell tumour, malignant Brenner tumour, carcinosar-
coma and undifferentiated carcinoma.9 Each subtype repre-
sents a distinct disease entity with a different site of origin,
pathogenesis, clinical features and prognosis. The complexity
of subclassiﬁcation and its effect on personalised treatment
choice underline the importance of histological tumour typing
by an expert gynaecological pathologist. Details of the mo-
lecularfeaturesofHGSC, EC,CCC,LGSCand MC are provided in
the Supplementary Material Section 1, available athttps://doi.
org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011. IHC staining patterns and
molecular features of the different subtypes are summarised
in Table 2. Certain genomic or molecular alterations, such as
BRCA1/2-mut
or
homologous
recombination
deﬁciency
(HRD), are helpful in predicting the magnitude of beneﬁt of
targeted therapy with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors
(PARPis) in high-grade tumours.10
Recommendations
 If EOC is suspected, diagnostic work-up should include
serum CA-125 measurement, pelvic US by an expert
examiner and CT scan of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis
[III, A].
 Pathological diagnosis should be made according to the
2020 WHO classiﬁcation by an expert gynaecological
pathologist [IV, A].
 All patients with high-grade ovarian cancer should be
tested for germline and/or somatic BRCA1/2-muts at
diagnosis [I, A].
 Testing for HRD is recommended in advanced high-grade
cancers [I, A].
STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
All patients with ovarian cancer should be surgically staged
according to the revised 2014 FIGO staging system for EOC
(Table 3).11 The histotype and primary site (i.e. ovary, fal-
lopian tube or peritoneum) of the tumour should be
established and recorded as part of routine staging for
treatment planning.
Thereisastrongprognosticlinkbetweenthedegreeofpost-
operative residual disease and patient survival.12 Preoperative
imaging can help predict the likelihood of suboptimal cytore-
ductive surgery.13 Extension of tumour from the omentum to
the spleen or liver surface (stage IIIC) should be differentiated
from isolated liver or spleen parenchymal metastases (stage
IVB). CT and positron emission tomography (PET)eCT imaging
have been shown to underestimate bowel or mesenteric
involvement compared with surgical exploration.14 Diffusion-
weighted magnetic resonance imaging may have better
sensitivity than CT for detecting involvement of surgically
critical tumour sites including mesenteric root inﬁltration,
small bowel and colon carcinomatosis.15
When the disease appears suitable for cytoreduction as
assessed by imaging, and there are no surgical or medical
Table 1. Diagnosis of EOC
Work-up if EOC is suspected
 Detailed history and clinical examination
 Serum CA-125
 Serum CEA and CA 19-9, in the case of MC, and endoscopy, if either or
both are elevated
 Transabdominal and transvaginal US by expert examiner
 CT of thorax, abdomen and pelvis
 Pathological examination of adequate tumour sample from diagnostic bi-
opsy or surgical specimen
 Cytological assessment of pleural effusion if present
CA 19-9, carbohydrate antigen 19-9; CA-125, cancer antigen 125; CEA, carcinoem-
bryonic antigen; CT, computed tomography; EOC, epithelial ovarian cancer; MC,
mucinous carcinoma; US, ultrasound.
Annals of Oncology
A. González-Martín et al.
834
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023



---
[PAGE 3/16]

contraindications, surgical staging (through midline lapa-
rotomy or initial laparoscopy) should be carried out to
explore the extent of the disease in the abdomino-
peritoneal cavity and assess the likelihood of achieving
optimal cytoreduction (no gross visible residual disease or
complete resection).
Recommendations
 The revised 2014 FIGO staging system for EOC should be
used [I, A].
MANAGEMENT OF EARLY EOC (FIGO STAGE I-II)
Figure 1 provides a treatment algorithm for the manage-
ment of FIGO stage I-II EOC. Supplementary Table S1,
available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011,
provides a summary of the beneﬁt of adjuvant systemic
therapy for FIGO stage I-II EOC.
Surgery
The aim of surgery for early EOC is complete resection of
the tumour and to undertake adequate staging, including:
Table 2. Pathology and molecular biology of EOC subtypes
HGSC
EC
CCC
LGSC
MC
IHC staining
p53
Abnormal
Abnormal/normal
Normal
Normal
Normal
p16
þ


WT-1
þ


þ

ER
þ/
þ

þ

PAX8
þ
þ
þ

Vimentin
þ
HNF1b
þ
CDX2
þ
Molecular alterations
(decreasing prevalence
from top to bottom)
TP53
CTNNB1
ARID1A
KRAS
CDKN2A
BRCA1/2
ARID1A
PI3KCA
BRAF
KRAS
HRD
PTEN
PTEN
RAF
HER2
KRAS
MSI/dMMR
TP53 (high-grade EC)
MSI/dMMR
CCC, clear-cell carcinoma; CDX2, homeobox protein CDX-2; dMMR, mismatch repair deﬁciency; EC, endometrioid carcinoma; EOC, epithelial ovarian cancer; ER, estrogen receptor;
HGSC, high-grade serous carcinoma; HNF1b, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1b; HRD, homologous recombination deﬁciency; IHC, immunohistochemistry; LGSC, low-grade serous
carcinoma; MC, mucinous carcinoma; MSI, microsatellite instability; PAX8, paired box gene 8; WT-1, Wilms tumour 1.
Table 3. FIGO staging system for EOC11
Stage I: Tumour conﬁned to ovaries or fallopian tube(s)
IA
Tumour limited to one ovary (capsule intact) or fallopian tube, without tumour on ovarian or fallopian tube surface and without malignant
cells in the ascites or peritoneal washings
IB
Tumour limited to both ovaries (capsules intact) or fallopian tubes, without tumour on ovarian or fallopian tube surface and without
malignant cells in the ascites or peritoneal washings
IC
Tumour limited to one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes, with any of the following:
IC1
Surgical spill
IC2
Capsule ruptured before surgery or tumour on ovarian or fallopian tube surface
IC3
Malignant cells in the ascites or peritoneal washings
Stage II: Tumour involves one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes with pelvic extension (below pelvic brim) or primary peritoneal cancer
IIA
Extension and/or implants on uterus and/or fallopian tubes and/or ovaries
IIB
Extension to other pelvic intraperitoneal tissues
Stage III: Tumour involves one or both ovaries or fallopian tubes or primary peritoneal cancer, with cytologically or histologically conﬁrmed spread to the
peritoneum outside the pelvis and/or metastasis to the retroperitoneal lymph nodes
IIIA1
Positive retroperitoneal lymph nodes only (cytologically or histologically proven):
IIIA1(i)
Metastasis 10 mm in greatest dimension
IIIA1(ii)
Metastasis >10 mm in greatest dimension
IIIA2
Microscopic extra-pelvic (above the pelvic brim) peritoneal involvement with or without positive retroperitoneal lymph nodes
IIIB
Macroscopic peritoneal metastasis beyond the pelvis 2 cm in greatest dimension, with or without metastasis to the retroperitoneal
lymph nodes
IIIC
Macroscopic peritoneal metastasis beyond the pelvis >2 cm in greatest dimension, with or without metastasis to the retroperitoneal
lymph nodes (includes extension of tumour to capsule of liver and spleen without parenchymal involvement of either organ)
Stage IV: Distant metastasis excluding peritoneal metastases
IVA
Pleural effusion with positive cytology
IVB
Parenchymal metastases and metastases to extra-abdominal organs (including inguinal lymph nodes and lymph nodes outside of the
abdominal cavity)
EOC, epithelial ovarian cancer; FIGO, International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics.
Reprinted from Mutch DG, et al.11 with permission from Elsevier.
A. González-Martín et al.
Annals of Oncology
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
835



---
[PAGE 4/16]

 Midline laparotomy
 Inspection and palpation of the whole abdominal cavity
 Peritoneal washing with cytological examination
 Biopsies from all visible lesions and all abdominal ﬁelds
 Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
 Hysterectomy
 Omentectomy
 Appendicectomy in MC
 Systematic pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy
Whether a laparoscopic approach is a safe alternative to
midline laparotomy is being debated, but as prospective
trials are lacking and the risk of capsule rupture increases,16
midline laparotomy remains the standard procedure. Sur-
gical staging will provide prognostic information and deﬁne
whether ChT is needed.
The availability of an intra-operative frozen section to
identify a malignant epithelial cancer may allow the
appropriate surgical staging to be done without the need
for a second operative procedure. Depending on the his-
tological grade and subtype, 60% of patients with
apparent early EOC will be upstaged after comprehensive
surgical staging, which can impact progression-free survival
(PFS) and overall survival (OS).17,18
Systematic pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy for
staging purposes is recommended for high-grade histol-
ogies. The rate of lymph node metastases in patients with
low-grade EC or expansile MC is <1%.19 Therefore, lym-
phadenectomy could be omitted in patients with these
subtypes and with radiologically and clinically negative
nodes. Further information on the role of lymphadenec-
tomy in stage I EOC is provided in the Supplementary
Material Section 2, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
annonc.2023.07.011.
Fertility-sparing surgery can be considered in young pa-
tients, but always after full discussion with the patient
about potential risks. Patients with any stage IA histotype
or stage IC1-2 with unilateral ovarian involvement and
favourable histology (i.e. low-grade tumours) would be
amenable to contralateral ovary and uterus preservation, in
combination with the other recommended surgical staging
procedures.20
Systemic therapy
Adjuvant platinum-based ChT signiﬁcantly prolongs OS and
PFS in patients with early-stage EOC, as demonstrated in
the joint analysis of ACTION and ICON1 trials and a
Figure 1. Management of early EOC (FIGO stage I-II).
See Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011, for a summary of the beneﬁt of adjuvant systemic therapy for early EOC (FIGO
I-II stage).
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; red: surgery; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; white: other aspects of management; dashed lines: optional therapy.
CCC, clear-cell carcinoma; ChT, chemotherapy; EC, endometrioid carcinoma; EOC, epithelial ovarian cancer; FIGO, International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics;
HGSC, high-grade serous carcinoma; LGSC, low-grade serous carcinoma; MC, mucinous carcinoma.
Annals of Oncology
A. González-Martín et al.
836
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023



---
[PAGE 5/16]

Cochrane
systematic
review.21-23
An updated analysis
showed the beneﬁt of adjuvant ChT largely depended on
histological subtype (see Figure 1 and Supplementary
Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.
2023.07.011).22 A large Surveillance, Epidemiology and
End
Results
series
of
stage
I
EC
demonstrated
no
improvement in grade 1-2 EC.24 In CCC, retrospective
studies of an Asian population did not identify any beneﬁt
with adjuvant ChT for early-stage disease (stage IA-IC1).25 In
stage I MC, adjuvant ChT may be avoided for either
expansile subtype or grade 1 inﬁltrative based on the
excellent prognosis.26
The standard adjuvant ChT consists of six cycles of
platinum-based ChT. A Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG)
trial
comparing
three
versus
six
cycles
of
adjuvant
paclitaxelecarboplatin did not identify a signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in recurrence risk with longer treatment, but additional
toxicity occurred.27 Only serous carcinoma seems to beneﬁt
from longer adjuvant therapy compared with non-serous
tumours.28 The optimal ChT regimen (platinum alone or a
platinum-based combination) is not completely resolved.22
Recommendations
 Surgical staging is recommended in presumed early-stage
ovarian cancer for classiﬁcation and recommendation of
optimal systemic therapy [III, A].
 Adjuvant ChT in early-stage ovarian cancer is generally
recommended for FIGO stage I-IIB (see exceptions
below) [II, A], either paclitaxelecarboplatin [I, B] or car-
boplatin (six cycles) alone [I, A].
 For patients receiving paclitaxelecarboplatin, a mini-
mum of three cycles are recommended except for
HGSC/high-grade EC or any stage IC-II regardless of histo-
type, for which six cycles are suggested [II, B].
 The beneﬁt of adjuvant ChT is uncertain and can be
considered as optional [III, C] for:
o LGSC stage IB-IC
o CCC stage IA-IC1
o Low-grade EC stage IB-IC
o Expansile MC stage IC
o Inﬁltrative MC stage IA
 Adjuvant ChT is not recommended in completely staged
patients with LGSC stage IA, low-grade EC stage IA or
expansile MC stage IA-IB [II, E].
MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED EOC (FIGO STAGE III-IV)
Surgery
In advanced EOC, surgery aims to achieve a complete or
optimal cytoreduction, deﬁned as total macroscopic tumour
clearance with no residual visible disease, since this has
been shown to signiﬁcantly increase OS and PFS.12 This
needs maximal surgical effort and may require intestinal
resection, diaphragmatic and peritoneal stripping, splenec-
tomy and removal of bulky para-aortic lymph nodes and, in
some cases, extra-abdominal disease.29 An increasing body
of evidence suggests that surgical expertise and specialist
training result in improvements in the rate of complete
cytoreduction. Thus, patients with advanced disease are
advised to undergo surgery in specialised centres with
adequate infrastructure and trained teams.30 Patients with
macroscopic complete resection and clinically negative
nodes do not beneﬁt from systematic lymphadenectomy,
which unnecessarily increases the rate of post-operative
complications and mortality.31
The timing of surgical cytoreduction in relation to ChT is
still debated. The gold standard in patients with stage III-IV
disease is primary cytoreductive surgery (PCS), if physically
able to undergo surgery and complete resection seems
achievable, followed by systemic treatment (Figure 2). PCS
is also recommended in patients with less chemosensitive
subtypes (e.g. MC or LGSC), even if uncertainty about
achieving complete resection exists and a small residual
tumour (<1 cm) is likely to remain.32
Prospective trials have shown that three cycles of
platinum-based neoadjuvant ChT (NACT) followed by ICS
and completion of ChT was not inferior to PCS followed by
ChT in patients with advanced bulky stage IIIC or IV disease,
for whom complete resection at primary surgery is unlikely
or extensive surgery is not tolerable due to frailty or other
signiﬁcant comorbidities.33,34 In all neoadjuvant trials,
however, the PFS and OS were lower than in primary sur-
gery trials. Due to the limitations of randomised NACT trials,
it is not yet determined whether NACT and ICS could be an
option for patients for whom complete resection at primary
surgery seems feasible. This is being addressed in the
TRUST/ENGOT-OV33/Arbeitsgemeinschaft
Gynäkologische
Onkologie (AGO)-OVAR OP.7 trial (NCT02828618).
Systemic therapy
Systemic ChT after surgery is recommended for all advanced
ovarian cancer, and consideration should be given to the
inclusion of antiangiogenic and maintenance therapies
(Figure 2).
ChT. Standard ChT consists of six cycles of paclitaxel (175
mg/m2)ecarboplatin [area under the curve (AUC) 5-6]
intravenously (i.v.) every 3 weeks.35 Prolonging ChT for
more than six cycles or adding a third drug does not result
in a better outcome.36 For patients with contraindications
to paclitaxel (i.e. allergy, neuropathy or intolerance),
combining carboplatin with docetaxel or pegylated lipo-
somal
doxorubicin
(PLD)
can
be
considered
as
an
alternative.37,38
The improved PFS and OS seen in the Japanese dose-
dense
ChT
trial39
using
weekly
paclitaxel
was
not
conﬁrmed in a further three randomised trials (GOG-262,40
ICON841 and MITO-742). Outcomes were similar and ICON8
did not show differences in quality of life (QoL).43 An
improved QoL, however, was seen in MITO-7 using weekly
carboplatin (AUC 2) and a lower weekly paclitaxel dose
(60 mg/m2), making this regimen a potential alternative for
more frail patients.
A. González-Martín et al.
Annals of Oncology
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
837



---
[PAGE 6/16]

Figure 2. Management of advanced EOC (FIGO stage III-IV).
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; red: surgery; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments; white:
other aspects of management.
AUC, area under the curve; ChT, chemotherapy; EMA, European Medicines Agency; EOC, epithelial ovarian cancer; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of
molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; FIGO, International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics; HRD, homologous recombination deﬁciency;
MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; PARPi, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor; wt, wild type.
aESMO-MCBS v1.1104 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS
Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
bWeekly ChT with paclitaxel (60 mg/m2)ecarboplatin (AUC 2) can be an alternative in frail patients [I, B].
cOnly when patients have complete or partial response to platinum or no evidence of disease. For patients without response to platinum, a PARPi is not indicated; these
patients can be managed with bevacizumab maintenance if appropriate (mainly stable disease), or with second-line therapy if they have progressive disease (see
Figure 3).
dESCAT scores apply to alterations from genomic-driven analyses only. These scores have been deﬁned by the guideline authors, assisted if needed by the ESMO
Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.103 See Supplementary Table S3, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011, for more
information on ESCAT scores.
eOption for patients for whom bevacizumab was added to paclitaxelecarboplatin.
Annals of Oncology
A. González-Martín et al.
838
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023



---
[PAGE 7/16]

A meta-analysis of ﬁve randomised trials44 using post-
operative intraperitoneal (i.p.) ChT reported a beneﬁt in
PFS and OS compared with i.v. ChT regimens in patients
with a small volume (<1 cm) or no residual disease after
surgery. Nevertheless, the negative results of the GOG-252
trial (a large randomised phase III trial comparing two
i.p. platinum-based regimens, i.p. carboplatin AUC 6 or i.p.
cisplatin 75 mg/m2, with i.v. administration combined with
bevacizumab),45 together with the greater toxicity and
complexity of i.p. administration, have led to the decline of
this strategy as a standard of care.
Hyperthermic i.p. perioperative ChT (HIPEC) in ﬁrst line
has been explored in OVHIPEC, a randomised phase III trial
comparing NACT followed by ICS with or without HIPEC.46
The trial showed signiﬁcantly longer PFS and OS without
increased toxicity with HIPEC. Nevertheless, an imbalance
of prognostic factors such as tumour histotype, the lack of
stratiﬁcation based on well-recognised prognostic factors
such as tumour BRCA1/2-mut and HRD status and the
limited sample size made it very difﬁcult to extrapolate
these results. In another randomised trial, HIPEC did not
show survival superiority over standard treatment.47 Given
these concerns, HIPEC continues to be an area of research
and should not be considered as standard therapy.
Antiangiogenic therapy in the ﬁrst line. Bevacizumab is a
monoclonal antibody targeting vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF). Two large RCTs, GOG-21848 and ICON7,49
showed that the addition of bevacizumab to paclitaxele
carboplatin ﬁrst-line therapy followed by bevacizumab as
maintenance resulted in a statistically signiﬁcant increase in
PFS versus ChT alone, but without an OS beneﬁt. A post hoc
subgroup analysis suggested a greater beneﬁt in PFS and OS
in the clinical ‘high-risk’ population (deﬁned as patients
with stage III and macroscopic residual tumour >1 cm or
stage IV).50 In ICON7 the dose of bevacizumab was 7.5 mg/
kg and the duration of treatment was shorter (12 months).
Although this lower dose is used by some, the licensed dose
of bevacizumab is 15 mg/kg given for 15 months in com-
bination with ﬁrst-line paclitaxelecarboplatin ChT to pa-
tients with stage IIIB-IV (FIGO 1988 classiﬁcation) ovarian
cancer, regardless of histology. In the ENGOT-OV15 study, a
longer duration of bevacizumab administration (30 versus
15 months) did not improve PFS.51
Bevacizumab in combination with NACT has been
explored in two small randomised trials, ANTHALYA and
GEICO 1205/NOVA.52,53 Although no increase in grade 3-4
toxicities compared with ChT alone was reported, the po-
tential beneﬁt of two to three doses of bevacizumab before
ICS is debatable due to its lack of impact on complete
resection rate and PFS.
HRD and PARPis. Up to 50% of HGSCs are detected as HRD-
positive with current tests. Included in these are 15%-20% of
gBRCA1/2-mut cases. Somatic BRCA1/2-muts, epigenetic
silencing via hypermethylation of the BRCA1 promoter and
deﬁciency in other proteins and pathways involved in the
homologous recombination repair of DNA double-strand
breaks contribute to the remainder of positive tests.54 HRD
positivity with or without BRCA1/2-mut is a well-established
predictive factor of the magnitude of response to PARPis.
The incorporation of PARPis as maintenance after ﬁrst-line
ChT has led to a new era in the ﬁrst-line management of
advanced HGSC/high-grade EC with unprecedented beneﬁt in
patients with BRCA1/2-mutated or BRCA1/2-wild type (wt)/
HRD-positive tumours. Supplementary Material Section 3,
available
at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011,
provides detailed information on the SOLO1,55 PAOLA-1/
ENGOT-OV2556 and PRIMA/ENGOT-OV26/GOG-301257 trials,
which led to the approval of olaparib in BRCA1/2-mutated
tumours, olaparibebevacizumab in HRD-positive tumours and
niraparib regardless of biomarker status of the tumour,
respectively. The results of the ATHENA-MONO/GOG-3020/
ENGOT-OV4558 and VELIA59 trials with rucaparib and veliparib,
respectively, are also described.
A descriptive OS analysis of SOLO1 at 7-year follow-up60
and the ﬁnal OS analysis of PAOLA-161 have shown a beneﬁt
in OS for olaparib in patients with BRCA1/2-mutated tu-
mours and olaparibebevacizumab in patients with HRD-
positive tumours regardless of BRCA1/2-mut status (see
Supplementary Material Section 3, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011).
Non-high-grade serous advanced ovarian cancer. Pacli-
taxelecarboplatin is the standard systemic ChT used in
LGSC, CCC and MC. Multiple retrospective studies, however,
showed lower response rates in these histotypes compared
with HGSC.62-64 Bevacizumab has shown activity in all his-
totypes including those less chemoresponsive, e.g. LGSC or
CCC.49 The majority of LGSCs have high expression of es-
trogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PgR);
retrospective studies suggest a possible therapeutic value of
hormone therapy in the maintenance of newly diagnosed
advanced LGSC.65 This intervention is currently under
evaluation in a prospective RCT (NCT04095364).
Recommendations
 Patients with advanced EOC should be evaluated for PCS
by a specialised team, with the aim of achieving
complete cytoreduction (absence of all visible residual
disease) [III, A].
 When complete cytoreductive surgery is feasible, PCS is
recommended [III, A]; otherwise, obtaining adequate bi-
opsy tissue for histology and molecular testing is recom-
mended [III, A].
 When complete cytoreductive surgery is not feasible,
NACT for three cycles followed by ICS and three cycles
of paclitaxelecarboplatin are recommended [I, A].
 Bevacizumab in the neoadjuvant setting, before ICS, can
be considered [II, B].
 When ICS is not possible, and in the absence of overt dis-
ease progression, three additional cycles of paclitaxele
carboplatin alone [I, A] or with bevacizumab [II, B] are
recommended.
 Systemic therapy decisions should be informed by
BRCA1/2-mut (germline and/or somatic) and HRD status
testing carried out at primary diagnosis [I, A].
A. González-Martín et al.
Annals of Oncology
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
839



---
[PAGE 8/16]

 Paclitaxel (175 mg/m2)ecarboplatin (AUC 5-6) every 3
weeks for six cycles is the standard ﬁrst-line ChT in
advanced ovarian cancer [I, A].
 The schedule of weekly ChT with paclitaxel (60 mg/m2)e
carboplatin (AUC 2) can be considered as an alternative
in frail patients [I, B].
 Bevacizumab improves PFS in patients with stage III-IV
ovarian cancer and should be considered in addition to
paclitaxelecarboplatin
[I,
A;
European
Society
for
Medical Oncology-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale
(ESMO-MCBS) v1.1 score: 3; MCBS v1.1 score: 4 in
high-risk patients].
 Given the controversy about i.p. ChT [I, E] and HIPEC
[II, D], they are not considered a standard of care in
ﬁrst-line treatment.
 Maintenance treatment with PARPis, with or without
bevacizumab,
is
recommended
for
patients
with
BRCA1/2-mutated or BRCA1/2-wt/HRD-positive tumours
with no evidence of disease at the end of ChT or a com-
plete or partial response to platinumepaclitaxel ﬁrst-line
ChT [I, A].
o For BRCA1/2-mutated: olaparib for 2 years [ESMO-
MCBS v1.1 score: 4; ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionabil-
ity of molecular Targets (ESCAT) score: I-A], niraparib
for 3 years [ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score:
I-A] or olaparibebevacizumab for 2 years [ESMO-
MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-A].
o For BRCA1/2-wt/HRD-positive: niraparib for 3 years
[ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-A] or
olaparibebevacizumab for 2 years [ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 3; ESCAT score: I-A).
 Maintenance treatment with either bevacizumab [I, A] or
niraparib for 3 years [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3] can
be recommended for HRD-negative tumours, with the
latter
following
complete
or
partial
response
to
platinumepaclitaxel ﬁrst-line ChT. The choice of treat-
ment should be based on disease and clinical character-
istics of the patient.
 Maintenance with anti-estrogen therapy after ﬁrst-line
platinum-based ChT can be considered in LGSC [IV, B].
MANAGEMENT OF RECURRENT EOC
Patient assessment
Up to 70% of patients with stage III-IV high-grade ovarian
cancer will relapse within 3 years. Relapse rates for early-
stage ovarian cancer are much lower.
Several factors need to be assessed when selecting a
treatment for patients with recurrent disease (Figure 3).
Systemic therapy of recurrent disease is based on plat-
inum-containing
or
non-platinum-containing
regimens.
There are currently no molecular biomarkers to predict ef-
ﬁcacy of platinum rechallenge. The deﬁnition of platinum
sensitivity based on a 6-month cut-off of treatment-free
interval from last platinum (TFIp) was challenged during
the Fifth Gynecological Cancer InterGroup (GCIG) Ovarian
Cancer Consensus Conference and later discontinued in
clinical practice following the 2018 ESMOeEuropean Soci-
ety of Gynaecological Oncology (ESGO) Consensus Confer-
ence, as many factors may inﬂuence TFIp (e.g. the
frequency of follow-up and interval of diagnostic tests) and
the response to platinum (i.e. histotype or BRCA1/2-mut
status).32,66 Not all patients with TFIp >6 months respond
to platinum (objective response rate 47.2%-66%),32 and
conversely, platinum-based combinations have demon-
strated activity in patients with TFIp <6 months.67
Surgery for relapse
The role of surgery for patients with a ﬁrst relapse >6
months after the end of platinum-based ChT in the ﬁrst line
was addressed by one non-randomised trial and three
prospective randomised trials.68-71
The DESKTOP series deﬁned the AGO score to identify
patients for whom complete resection is feasible. In pa-
tients with a positive AGO scoreddeﬁned as having com-
plete resection at primary surgery (alternatively FIGO stage
I-II),
good
performance
status
(Eastern
Cooperative
Oncology Group 0) and absence of ascites (<500 ml)dthe
likelihood of achieving a complete resection is 76%.68
Subsequently, DESKTOP III demonstrated a beneﬁt in OS
and PFS for patients with positive AGO scores randomised
into secondary cytoreductive surgery followed by platinum-
based ChT versus ChT alone.69
The SOC-1 trial had a similar design, but patients were
selected according to the iModel. This trial was also positive
for PFS, but OS data are still immature.70
The GOG-0213 trial did not show a superiority with
respect to surgery.71 Although many explanations have
been proposed, the most convincing is the absence of
objective selection criteria for surgery.
Systemic therapy when platinum is an option
Patients should be considered for platinum-based therapy
at relapse if platinum is not contraindicated and there is a
reasonable likelihood that the patient may beneﬁt from
platinum rechallenge (no progression during platinum-
based therapy or shortly thereafter) (Figure 3).
ChT options. A meta-analysis of randomised trials comparing
carboplatin-based doublet ChT with carboplatin mono-
therapy demonstrated a beneﬁt in PFS and OS.72 Current
partners for combination therapy with carboplatin include
paclitaxel, gemcitabine or PLD,73-75 and the selection should
be based on safety proﬁle and patient preference. Based on
safety proﬁle, the combination of carboplatinePLD is
considered the preferred option.75 If combination therapy is
contraindicated, carboplatin monotherapy remains an option.
Treatment is usually recommended for four to six cycles.
Platinum hypersensitivity reactions (HSRs) affect w5% of
the general cancer population. Several outpatient-based
platinum ‘desensitisation’ protocols exist for gynaecological
oncology patients with HSRs that permit the successful re-
introduction of platinum-based therapy (carboplatin or
cisplatin) after patients have experienced HSRs.76
Annals of Oncology
A. González-Martín et al.
840
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023



---
[PAGE 9/16]

In the absence of contraindications to platinum, there is
no role for a non-platinum-based combination at ﬁrst
relapse, as was demonstrated by the lack of improvement in
OS in the randomised phase III INOVATYON trial, which
compared trabectedinePLD with carboplatinePLD in a
subgroup of patients with a TFIp of 6-12 months.77
Antiangiogenic therapy. Bevacizumab is approved in com-
bination with platinum-based combination therapy and
then as maintenance therapy in patients with a TFIp >6
months. Bevacizumab with platinum combinations (either
paclitaxel or gemcitabine followed by bevacizumab main-
tenance) leads to a signiﬁcant beneﬁt in objective response
rate and PFS.71,78 OS was similar in both arms, partially
explained by the high rate of crossover to bevacizumab in
subsequent
lines
of
therapy.78
PLDecarboplatinebev-
acizumab has demonstrated a statistically signiﬁcant PFS
and OS advantage compared with carboplatinegemcita-
bineebevacizumab, making the former combination the
preferred option if a carboplatin-based doublet with bev-
acizumab is selected.79
A
rechallenge
of
bevacizumab
combined
with
a
carboplatin-based doublet is associated with a signiﬁcant
improvement in median PFS compared with ChT alone in
patients previously treated with bevacizumab and having
relapsed with TFIp >6 months.80 Bevacizumab rechallenge
has not been licensed in Europe, however, and is, therefore,
not widely available.
Figure 3. Management of recurrent EOC.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; red: surgery; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments; white:
other aspects of management.
AGO, Arbeitsgemeinschaft Gynaekologische Onkologie; BSC, best supportive care; EMA, European Medicines Agency; EOC, epithelial ovarian cancer; FDA, Food and
Drug Administration; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; mut, muation; PARPi, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor; PLD, pegylated liposomal doxo-
rubicin; TFIp, treatment-free interval from last platinum.
aPatient choice and quality-of-life issues may also suggest that platinum is not the best option.
bIn patients with platinum intolerance who have relapsed >6 months from previous platinum, the combination of trabectedin and PLD may be recommended [II, C;
ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2 for patients with platinum-sensitive disease; EMA approved, not FDA approved].
cWeekly paclitaxel, PLD, topotecan or gemcitabine.
dESMO-MCBS v1.1104 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS
Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
ePaclitaxel, PLD or gemcitabine (carboplatinegemcitabineebevacizumab: ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3).d
fUntil disease progression or next line of treatment is started [I, A].
gOlaparib for BRCA1/2-mutated: ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2;d niraparib regardless of BRCA1/2-mut status: ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3;d rucaparib regardless of BRCA1/2-
mut status: ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3.d
A. González-Martín et al.
Annals of Oncology
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
841



---
[PAGE 10/16]

In phase III trials, bevacizumab was administered until
progression or unacceptable toxicity occurred. Treatment
should be maintained until clinical or radiological progres-
sion and should not be discontinued based solely on rising
CA-125.
Further information is provided in the Supplementary
Material Section 4, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
annonc.2023.07.011.
PARPis. Three PARPis (olaparib, niraparib and rucaparib) are
approved for maintenance therapy of patients with high-
grade tubo-ovarian carcinoma that achieve a response to
platinum rechallenge, irrespective of BRCA1/2-mut or HRD
status. Details of the outcome from four randomised trials
(Study 19, SOLO2, NOVA and ARIEL3) are given in the
Supplementary Material Section 4, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011.
The recommended length of PARPi treatment remains un-
clear. In NOVA and ARIEL3 treatment was stopped at pro-
gression, but in Study 19 and SOLO2 patients were allowed to
continue olaparib beyond progression, if it was considered
beneﬁcial. From a clinical perspective, treatment beyond dis-
ease progression may have particular value in slow-growing
tumours or in the context of oligometastatic disease (e.g.
single site of progression). All trials have shown that there is a
small group of ‘super-responder’ patients (w10%) without
progression after 5 years on treatment with PARPis.
Recently, data on OS after maintenance therapy raised
concern about a possible detrimental effect of PARPis,
particularly for non-gBRCA1/2-mut carriers. The OS ana-
lyses, however, were secondary and underpowered end-
points. Long-term OS data from the NOVA trial and interim
survival analysis of the NORA study have not categorically
conﬁrmed the initial concern.81,82 Intermediate endpoints
such as PFS2 (time to second subsequent therapy) or death
suggest a continuing beneﬁt from PARPis beyond progres-
sion. Nevertheless, an exploratory analysis in SOLO2 sug-
gested that gBRCA1/2-mut carriers who received olaparib
had a poorer response to platinum-based therapy on sub-
sequent relapse,83 raising the hypothesis that PARPis may
encourage platinum resistance. The licence for use of
PARPis has not been changed by the European Medicines
Agency (EMA), but has been withdrawn by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for niraparib and rucaparib (but
not olaparib) in non-gBRCA1/2-mut carriers. It is advisable,
therefore, to have a discussion with patients without a
BRCA1/2-mut about the beneﬁts and risks of PARPis.
There is currently no approval for pre-treatment with a
PARPi. One trial, OREO/ENGOT-OV38, showed a positive
short-lived
beneﬁt
for
some
patients
retreated
with
olaparib.84
Toxicity of PARPis is generally manageable through dose
individualisation (for niraparib), dose reductions and dose
interruptions. The rate of acute myeloid leukaemia and
myelodysplastic syndromes is higher among gBRCA1/2-
mutated patients and in the recurrent setting compared
with ﬁrst line. This can probably be explained by an accu-
mulative exposure to platinum.85
Several factors need to be taken into consideration for
the selection of PARPis or anti-VEGF therapies in relapse
including histotype, BRCA1/2-mut status, prior therapies
(PARPi and/or bevacizumab), expected response to plat-
inum ChT, presence of symptoms (speciﬁcally ascites),
persistent toxicities from prior therapies, no contraindica-
tion to bevacizumab and patient preference. Generally, for
symptomatic patients requiring a rapid treatment response,
the combination of carboplatin with bevacizumab would be
recommended (Figure 3).
Further information is provided in the Supplementary
Material Section 4, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
annonc.2023.07.011.
Systemic therapy when platinum is not an option
For some patients with recurrent ovarian cancer, platinum
rechallenge may not be considered clinically appropriate.
For these patients, alternative systemic treatments are
available. Patients with good performance status should be
prioritised for novel therapies within clinical trials. Inte-
grating early palliative care is particularly crucial.
Non-platinum ChT options. Single-agent non-platinum ChT
regimens include weekly paclitaxel, topotecan, gemcitabine,
PLD and oral metronomic cyclophosphamide. These have
shown modest activity in patients with relapsed ovarian
cancer for whom platinum is not an option, with 10%-15%
objective response rate and median OS of 10-12 months.86-90
With regard to selecting a particular regimen, there are no
robust randomised data to support one agent over another,
and not all are licensed for this indication. The choice should
be guided by patient preference and toxicity proﬁle. The
optimal duration of treatment is unclear; in clinical trials, ChT
with non-platinum agents was planned until tumour pro-
gression or unacceptable toxicity.
TrabectedinePLD is approved in Europe for patients re-
lapsing >6 months after last platinum.91 This combination
is an option when such patients are ineligible for further
platinum.
Data
with
antibody-drug
conjugates
have
shown
encouraging results (see Supplementary Material Section 4,
available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011).
Antiangiogenic therapy. The addition of bevacizumab to
second- or third-line non-platinum ChT (paclitaxel, PLD or
topotecan) in the AURELIA trial demonstrated an improve-
ment in median PFS, tumour response rate and QoL scores
compared with ChT alone.92 Notably, this trial excluded all
patients at increased risk of intestinal ﬁstulae (progression
during ﬁrst-line platinum, history of bowel obstruction or
serosal invasion), and <10% of patients had been previ-
ously exposed to bevacizumab.
Systemic therapy for non-high-grade subtypes
Less common histological subtypes such as CCC, carcino-
sarcoma or LGSC are known to be less responsive to ChT
including platinum.93 For these patients, once platinum is
no longer an option, participation in clinical trials is strongly
Annals of Oncology
A. González-Martín et al.
842
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023



---
[PAGE 11/16]

recommended.94 For LGSC, one randomised phase III trial
demonstrated signiﬁcantly improved PFS and response rate
for the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) in-
hibitor trametinib compared with standard of care (single-
agent ChT or hormonal therapy at the choice of the inves-
tigator).95 Another phase III trial with binimetinib, however,
did not have a positive result.96 These slowly proliferating
tumours frequently express ER and/or PgR, and although
objective tumour responses are low, hormonal therapies
can be used to control tumour growth (e.g. aromatase
inhibitors,
tamoxifen
or
luteinising
hormone-releasing
hormone agonists).
Recommendations
 The following should be assessed when selecting treatment
for patients with recurrent disease [I-III, A]:
o Histotype
o BRCA1/2-mut status
o Number of prior lines of treatment
o Exposure and response to prior treatment
o TFIp
o Possibility of achieving a complete secondary surgical
cytoreduction
o Residual ChT toxicity
o The patient’s general condition and preferences
 Patients with ﬁrst relapse of ovarian cancer after >6
months of last platinum administration should be evalu-
ated by a gynaecological oncology centre experienced in
surgery for ovarian cancer to identify potential candi-
dates for surgical cytoreduction [I, A].
 Patients who have previously responded to platinum
without early symptomatic relapse should be treated
with either a platinum-based doublet (PLD, gemcitabine
or paclitaxel) with bevacizumab [I, A; carboplatine
gemcitabineebevacizumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3]
or a platinum-based doublet followed by maintenance
with PARPi therapy if a response is achieved and the
patient has not been previously exposed to PARPis
[I, A; olaparib for BRCA1/2-mutated: ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 2; niraparib regardless of BRCA1/2-mut status:
ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; rucaparib regardless of
BRCA1/2-mut status: ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
 For patients requiring rapid response, the combination
of a platinum-based doublet (PLD, gemcitabine or pacli-
taxel) with bevacizumab is preferred [V, A; carboplatine
gemcitabineebevacizumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
 Bevacizumab should be continued until disease progres-
sion (symptomatic) or the next line of treatment is
started, as continuation of bevacizumab beyond progres-
sion has not been evaluated in the recurrent setting
[I, A].
 PARPis should be continued until disease progression or
the next line of treatment is started [I, A], as the beneﬁt
of continuing treatment beyond progression has not
been demonstrated conclusively to date [III, B].
 Platinum rechallenge following treatment with a non-
platinum regimen (monotherapy or combination) could
be considered if the tumour did not progress during
prior platinum therapy [III, B].
 Patients with relapsed EOC for whom platinum is not an
option should be deﬁned by [II-IV, A]:
o Proven resistance (progression during platinum)
o Expected resistance (early symptomatic progression
post-platinum, response to rechallenge unlikely)
o Platinum intolerance
o Patient choice
o QoL issues
 For patients not candidates to receive platinum, inte-
grating palliative care early in the treatment pathway
is strongly recommended [I, A].
 Single-agent non-platinum options that can be recom-
mended include weekly paclitaxel, PLD, topotecan and
gemcitabine [I, B].
 In patients with platinum intolerance who have relapsed
>6 months from previous platinum, trabectedinePLD
may be recommended [II, C; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2
for
patients
with
platinum-sensitive
disease;
EMA
approved, not FDA approved].
 Bevacizumab should be recommended in combination
with weekly paclitaxel, PLD or topotecan in patients
without contraindications to bevacizumab and not previ-
ously exposed to bevacizumab [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 4].
 Hormonal therapy is recommended for relapsed LGSC
[II, A].
 For patients with recurrent LGSC, treatment with the
MEK inhibitor trametinib should be considered after
prior platinum-based ChT and hormone therapy (not
EMA approved) [I, A].
FOLLOW-UP, LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS AND
SURVIVORSHIP
Surveillance
Although a cure is unlikely after relapse, effective therapies
exist for the treatment of patients with recurrent ovarian
cancer. Therefore, surveillance in these patients is indicated
with a combination of thorough symptom review and
physical examination. Studies have noted that 26%-50% of
recurrences are in the pelvis97 suggesting a role for pelvic
examination in the follow-up of ovarian cancer. Disease
recurrence, however, may be located outside of the pelvis,
e.g. in lymph nodes, liver, lungs or peritoneal carcinoma-
tosis and may not be detectable by pelvic examination. CT
scans have been noted to have a sensitivity of 79% and
speciﬁcity of 84% for detecting relapse in a large pooled
meta-analysis.98 CT scans are indicated if symptoms suggest
recurrent disease or if the CA-125 is rising.98
CA-125 has been evaluated in the surveillance of ovarian
cancer and has been noted to be elevated 2-5 months
before radiographic detection of cancer. In a large pro-
spective phase III Medical Research Council UK OV05/
EORTC 55955 trial, there was no difference in OS when ChT
was initiated based solely on rising CA-125 levels versus
A. González-Martín et al.
Annals of Oncology
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
843



---
[PAGE 12/16]

when disease recurrence had become clinically evident.99
The beneﬁt of surveillance with CA-125 in the current
eradwhen more sensitive radiological detection methods
such as PETeCT and complete secondary cytoreduction and
targeted therapy have been shown to improve out-
comesdhas yet to be deﬁned.
BRCA1/2-mut carriers and survival
Although surveillance is generally undertaken for 5 years
after the most recent remission, longer follow-up may be
considered in BRCA1/2-mut carriers, given their improved
long-term survival and need for breast cancer surveillance.
In a pooled analysis of 1213 EOC cases with pathogenic
gBRCA1-mut (n ¼ 909) or gBRCA2-mut (n ¼ 304) and of
2666 non-carriers, an improved 5-year OS was noted among
BRCA1/2-mut carriers with ovarian cancer.100 A more recent
report of 15-year survival data in BRCA1/2-mut carriers
suggests that the survival beneﬁt appears to be within the
ﬁrst 5 years and decreases over time.101
Recommendations
 Surveillance of ovarian cancer patients can include CA-
125 determination, physical examination and CT scan
evaluation [IV, B].
 BRCA1/2-mut carriers can be considered for follow-up
beyond 5 years [III, B].
 Long-term BRCA1/2-mut survivors should be referred to
high-risk breast cancer clinics for follow-up [I, A].102
METHODOLOGY
This Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) was developed in
accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures
for CPG development (https://www.esmo.org/Guidelines/
ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology). The
relevant
literature
has been selected by the expert authors. A table of ESCAT
scores is included in Supplementary Table S2, available
at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011.
ESCAT
scores have been deﬁned by the authors, assisted if needed
by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine
Working Group.103 A table of ESMO-MCBS scores is
included in Supplementary Table S3, available at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011.
ESMO-MCBS
v1.1104 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/in-
dications approved by the EMA or FDA (https://www.esmo.
org/Guidelines/ESMO-MCBS). The scores have been calcu-
lated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by
the ESMO Guidelines Committee. The FDA/EMA or other
regulatory body approval status of new therapies/in-
dications is reported at the time of writing this CPG. Levels
of evidence and grades of recommendation have been
applied using the system shown in Supplementary Table S4,
available
at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.
011.105 Statements without grading were considered justi-
ﬁed standard clinical practice by the authors. For future
updates to this CPG, including eUpdates and Living Guide-
lines, please see the ESMO Guidelines website: https://
www.esmo.org/guidelines/guidelines-by-topic/gynaecological-
cancers/newly-diagnosed-and-relapsed-epithelial-ovarian-
cancer.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Manuscript editing support was provided by Ioanna Ntai,
Catherine Evans, Claire Bramley and Jennifer Lamarre (ESMO
Guidelines staff); this support was funded by ESMO. Nathan
Cherny, Chair of the ESMO-MCBS Working Group, and Ura-
nia Dafni, Giota Zygoura, Georgia Dimopoulou and Tereza
Dellaporta of Frontier Science Foundation Hellas provided
review and validation of the ESMO-MCBS scores. Nicola
Latino (ESMO Scientiﬁc Affairs staff) provided coordination
and support of the ESMO-MCBS scoring and Angela Cor-
storphine of Kstorﬁn Medical Communications Ltd provided
medical writing and editing support in the preparation of the
ESMO-MCBS table; this support was funded by ESMO.
Dr Svetlana Jezdic (ESMO Medical Affairs staff) provided
coordination and support of the ESCAT scoring.
FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation
of this guideline. Production costs have been covered by
ESMO from central funds.
DISCLOSURE
AGM reports personal fees for advisory board membership
from Alkermes, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, Eisai,
Genmab, GSK, HederaDx, Illumina, ImmunoGen, Macro-
Genics, Mersana, MSD, Novartis, Oncoinvent, PharmaMar,
Regeneron, Roche, SOTIO, Sutro Biopharma and Tubulis;
personal fees as an invited speaker from AstraZeneca, Clovis
Oncology, GSK, MSD, Novocure, Roche, Takeda and Zai Lab;
institutional funding as coordinating principal investigator
(PI) from Aravive, GSK, Novartis and Roche; and a non-
remunerated role as Steering Committee Member for
MSD. PH reports personal fees for advisory board mem-
bership from AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, GSK, Immu-
noGen, Mersana, Miltenyi, MSD, Novartis and Roche;
personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen, Eisai,
Stryker and Zai Lab; personal fees for lectures from Astra-
Zeneca, GSK, MSD and Roche; personal fees as an Inde-
pendent Data Monitoring Committee (IDMC) member from
SOTIO; institutional funding as Trial Chair from AstraZeneca,
GSK, ImmunoGen and Roche; institutional funding as local
PI from Genmab; institutional funding from Clovis Oncology
and Seagen; and a non-remunerated role as PI from
AstraZeneca. AL reports personal fees for advisory board
membership from Zentalis Pharmaceuticals; personal fees
as an invited speaker from GSK and Medscape; personal
fees for consultancy from GLG; personal fees for a writing
engagement from Onkoþ; fees paid to her institute for
advisory board membership from Ability Pharma, Apmonia,
AstraZeneca, Blueprint, Clovis Oncology, GSK, Merck Serono
and MSD; fees paid to her institute as an invited speaker
from AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology and Kephren Publishing;
fees paid to her institute for consultancy from Orion and
Annals of Oncology
A. González-Martín et al.
844
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2023.07.011
Volume 34
- Issue 10
- 2023



---
[PAGE 13/16]

Owkin; fees paid to her institute for steering committee
membership from MSD; institutional funding as a PI in
clinical trials from Agenus, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers
Squibb (BMS), GSK, Iovance; MSD and Roche; institutional
funding as a Chief Investigator in clinical trials from Astra-
Zeneca and OSE Immunotherapeutics; institutional research
grants as a PI in translational research from ARCAGY-
GINECO, AstraZeneca and Sanoﬁ; a non-remunerated role
as an IDMC member for Clovis Oncology, as an IDMC Chair
for Pﬁzer (proprietary information) and as a member of the
GCIG; and non-remunerated academic research projects for
LXRepair and Owkin. DL reports personal fees for advisory
board membership from AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology,
Corcept, Genmab, GSK, ImmunoGen, MSD, Oncoinvest,
PharmaMar, Seagen and Sutro Biopharma; personal fees as
an invited speaker from AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology,
Genmab, GSK, ImmunoGen, MSD, PharmaMar and Seagen;
personal fees for consultancy from AstraZeneca, Clovis
Oncology, Genmab, GSK, ImmunoGen, MSD, Novartis,
PharmaMar and Seagen; travel grants from AstraZeneca,
Clovis Oncology and GSK; institutional funding as coordi-
nating PI from Clovis Oncology, Genmab and MSD; institu-
tional funding for a clinical trial/contracted research from
AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, Genmab, GSK, ImmunoGen,
Incyte, MSD, Novartis, Roche and Seagen; institutional
funding
for
founding
an
academic
trial
from
Clovis
Oncology, GSK, MSD and PharmaMar; a non-remunerated
role as a PI in clinical trials for AstraZeneca, Clovis
Oncology,
Genmab,
GSK,
ImmunoGen,
Incyte,
MSD,
Novartis, PharmaMar, Roche and Seagen; and a non-
remunerated role as a member of the Board of Directors
of GCIG. REM reports personal fees for advisory board
membership from AstraZeneca, GSK and Merck; personal
fees as an invited speaker from AstraZeneca, Clovis
Oncology and GSK; and personal fees for expert testimony
from Ellipses and Shionogi. BP reports personal fees for
advisory
board membership from
AstraZeneca,
Clovis
Oncology, Eisai, GSK, GOG Foundation, Lilly, Merck, Mer-
sana, Seattle Genetics, Sutro and Tesaro; personal fees for
consulting from Arquer Diagnostics, Atossa, Bioascend,
Deciphera, Elevar, Imab, Onclive, Onconova Therapeutics,
PeerView, Toray and WebMD; institutional funding as local
PI from Acrivon, AstraZeneca, Celgene, Celsion, Clovis
Oncology, Eisai, GSK, ImmunoGen, Incyte, Karyopharm,
Merck, Mersana, Roche Genentech, Seattle Genetics, Sutro,
Takeda, Tesaro, Toray and VBL Therapeutics; membership of
the GOG Partners group at the GOG Foundation; and
membership of the Board of Directors of the Society of
Gynecologic Oncology (SGO). IRC reports personal fees for
advisory board membership from Adaptimmune, Agenus,
Amgen, AstraZeneca, BMS, Clovis Oncology, Daiichi Sankyo,
Deciphera, EQRX, Eisai, GSK, MacroGenics, Merck Sereno,
Mersana, Novartis, Oxnea, Roche and Sutro Biopharma;
fees paid to her institute for advisory board membership
from MSD; fees paid to her institute for translational
research from BMS; a non-remunerated role as President of
GINECO; and a non-remunerated role as PI for PAOLA-1.
DSPT
reports
personal
fees
for
advisory
board
membership from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingel-
heim, Eisai, Genmab, GSK, MSD and Roche; personal fees as
an invited speaker from AstraZeneca, Eisai, GSK, Merck
Serono, MSD, Roche and Takeda; ownership of stocks/
shares of Asian Microbiome Library (AMiLi); institutional
research grants from AstraZeneca, Bayer, Karyopharm
Therapeutics and Roche; institutional funding as coordi-
nating PI from AstraZeneca and Bergen Bio; institutional
funding as local PI from Bayer, Byondis B.V. and Zeria
Pharmaceutical Co Ltd; a previous non-renumerated role as
Chair of the Asia-Paciﬁc Gynecologic Oncology Trials Group
(APGOT); a previous non-renumerated role as the Society
President of the Gynecologic Cancer Group Singapore; non-
renumerated membership of the Board of Directors of the
GCIG; and product samples from AstraZeneca, Cyclacel
Pharmaceuticals, Eisai and MSD (non-ﬁnancial interest). EB
declares no conﬂicts of interest. AO reports personal fees
for advisory board membership from Agenus, AstraZeneca,
Clovis Oncology, Corcept Therapeutics, Deciphera Pharma-
ceuticals, Eisai, Exelisis, EMD Serono, F. Hoffmann-La Roche,
Genmab, GSK, ImmunoGen, Itheos, Merck Sharps & Dohme
de España, SA, Mersana Therapeutics, Novocure, OncXerna
Therapeutics, Inc., PharmaMar, Regeneron, Sattucklabs,
Seagen and Sutro Biopharma; personal fees for travel/ac-
commodation from AstraZeneca, PharmaMar and Roche;
institutional funding from Abbvie Deutschland, Advaxis Inc.,
Aeterna Zentaris, Amgen, Aprea Therapeutics AB, BMS,
Clovis Oncology Inc, Eisai Co, Ltd, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd,
ImmunoGen Inc, Merck, Sharp & Dohme de España SA,
Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc, PharmaMar SA, Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals and Tesaro Inc.; non-remunerated roles at
ESMO (member, Ofﬁcer, Co-Chair of the ESMO Gynaeco-
logical Cancers Congress 2023-2025, Chair of the Gynaeco-
logical
Track
ESMO
2019,
Scientiﬁc
Track
Member
Gynaecological Cancers ESMO 2018, ESMO 2020, ESMO
2022, member of the Gynaecological Cancers Faculty and
Subject Editor for the Gynaecological CPGs); a non-
remunerated role at GCIG (member and Cervix Cancer
Chair on behalf of GEICO); and membership of ASCO, GOG
and SEOM. JAL reports personal fees for advisory board
membership for Artios Pharma, AstraZeneca, BMS, Clovis
Oncology, Eisai, Ellipses, GSK, Immagene, ImmunoGen,
Merck/MSD, Miltenyi, Novocure, Nuvation and VBL Thera-
peutics; personal fees as an invited speaker from AstraZe-
neca, Clovis Oncology, GSK and Neopharm; personal fees as
an IDMC member from Mersana and Sutro Bio; a remu-
nerated leadership role as an Associate Editor of Thera-
peutic Advances in Medical Oncology (Sage Publishing);
institutional research grants from AstraZeneca and MSD/
Merck; non-remunerated roles at ESMO (Ofﬁcer and Sub-
ject Editor for the Gynaecological CPGs); and a non-
remunerated leadership role as Vice-President of ESGO
(2019-2021).